 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  CF 854)
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
Federal Court
O'Keefe, J.
July 5, 2012.
Counsel:
Shelley Levine, for the applicant;
Nadine Silverman, for the respondent.
Solicitors of Record:
Levine Associates, Toronto, Ontario, for the applicant;
Myles J. Kirvan, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Toronto, Ontario, for the respondent.
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary. Any footnotes found in this case will appear below end of document.
[1]
O'Keefe, J.
: This is an application pursuant to subsection 72(1) of the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act
, SC 2001, c 27 (the Act) for judicial review of a decision of the Immigration and Refugee Board, Refugee Protection Division (the Board), dated May 9, 2011, wherein the applicant was determined to be neither a Convention refugee within the meaning of section 96 of the Act nor a person in need of protection as defined in subsection 97(1) of the Act.
[2]
This conclusion was based on the Board's finding that the applicant was not credible and that it was not a serious possibility that the applicant would be persecuted for practicing his religion and worshipping in a Christian congregation if he returned to his home in the Fujian Province of China.
[3]
The applicant requests that this Court order
certiorari
to quash the Board's decision and order
mandamus
compelling the Board to grant a new hearing.
Background
[4]
The applicant, Shoupeng Wei, is a citizen of the People's Republic of China (China) and a practicing Christian from the Fujian Province. The applicant is married and has a son and a daughter. His family remains in China.
[5]
In June 2005, the applicant's health began deteriorating. He sought medical help but doctors were unable to diagnose his sickness. The applicant confided in his friend Liu Zhong, who told him about the Christian faith. After both the applicant and his friend prayed for him, the applicant began recovering.
[6]
On August 7, 2005, the applicant attended his first underground church service. The underground church, which comprised approximately thirteen members, was held in secret at the homes of two of the devotees. During the service, look-outs were assigned to watch for members of the Public Security Bureau (PSB). On February 26, 2006, the applicant was baptized and the following month he successfully recruited his friend, Chen Jin to the church.
[7]
On April 13, 2006, the underground church service was interrupted by a warning that members of the PSB were approaching. In fear of arrest, the applicant went into hiding at his sister-in-law's home. Two days later, members of the PSB visited and searched the applicant's home. They informed his wife that they were aware of his illegal religious activities and asked her about his whereabouts. The applicant's wife denied knowing anything. The PSB ordered the applicant's immediate surrender and demanded that his wife report any information she obtained about him. On April 18, 2006, the applicant discovered that three church members had been caught during the PSB raid.
[8]
After nine months in hiding, the applicant found a smuggler with his sister-in-law's help. The smuggler provided him with a Canadian visa and accompanied him to Canada. On January 13, 2007, the applicant arrived in Canada. He filed a claim for refugee protection on January 26, 2007.
[9]
In his Personal Information Form (PIF) dated March 2007, the applicant stated that the PSB continued to search for him and had visited his home on several occasions. In addition, the applicant stated that the three detained members of his church remained in detention awaiting sentencing.
[10]
The applicant's claim was previously heard by a different board of the Refugee Protection Division. That Board denied the applicant's claim for lack of credibility. On judicial review, Mr. Justice Michel Beaudry overturned that decision finding that the Board made two reviewable errors that were central to the applicant's claim (see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2010] FCJ No 832).
[11]
The new hearing of the applicant's refugee claim was held on January 25 and April 27, 2011.
Board's Decision
[12]
The Board released its decision on May 9, 2011. It noted that the hearing was conducted
de novo
as ordered by the Federal Court in
Wei
above.
[13]
The Board addressed two main issues in its decision: credibility and whether there was a serious possibility that the applicant would be persecuted for practicing Christianity in the Fujian Province. The Board's assessment of both these issues is described here. However, the Board's assessment of the applicant's credibility was not challenged in this application. This application is limited to the Board's assessment on the second issue.
Credibility
[14]
The Board began by acknowledging that the evidence established the applicant's identity as a Chinese national. The Board noted that it was mindful of the applicant's age, education and background in assessing his credibility. This included the applicant's level of education (grade five), difficulties associated with the hearing room and stresses inherent in responding through an interpreter. Recognizing these challenges, the Board explained that it granted the applicant repeated opportunities to answer questions throughout the hearing.
[15]
The Board observed that the applicant frequently testified in a "vague, evasive and confusing manner" on material aspects of his claim. In addition, it found that the applicant's testimony was "shifting, inconsistent and evasive". The Board also found that significant details pertaining to key issues in the applicant's refugee claim were omitted from his PIF and the accompanying narrative.
[16]
The Board found that credibility was the determinative issue in this claim, specifically, the credibility of the applicant's PIF narrative, his oral testimony on his membership in an underground church and his pursuit by the PSB.
[17]
In coming to its negative credibility finding, the Board drew negative inferences from the applicant's testimony and submissions on the following:
1. Information that the applicant's friend had told him about Christianity;
2. The applicant's illness;
3. Beginning of the applicant's attendance at the underground church;
4. PSB search for the applicant;
5. PSB raid on the church;
6. Repercussions on the applicant's family in China; and
7. Jail release notification, jail visiting card and sentence verification.
[18]
The Board noted that the applicant was not forthcoming on the topics that he discussed with the friend that first told him about Christianity. However, when prompted with answers included in his PIF, the applicant responded affirmatively. The Board drew a negative inference from the applicant's inability to accurately recall information that had initiated his life changing experience.
[19]
Secondly, the Board noted the discrepancy in the applicant's reported illness. In his PIF, he described his condition as undeterminable, whereas health records included with his claim indicated that he had been diagnosed with gastritis. Recognizing the applicant's level of education, the Board asked the applicant if he understood the meaning of diagnosis. The Board noted that the applicant responded with a clear definition and showed familiarity with other medical terms. On this basis, the Board found that the applicant did not provide a reasonable explanation for the inconsistency between his PIF and the documentary evidence.
[20]
Turning to August 2005, when the applicant first began attending the underground church, the Board asked the applicant if he had been aware of the consequences associated with his involvement with the church. The applicant replied that he did not think about the consequences at that time and his friend did not indicate that there were any problems. The Board also questioned the applicant about other special events that occurred in his family at that time. After much unsuccessful probing, the Board asked the applicant about his father's death (in July 2005) and his son's birth (in August 2005). The applicant became emotional on being questioned about his father, and later confirmed that Christianity had helped him deal with his death. When asked why he did not include this information in his PIF, the applicant explained that the consultant had not asked him about it. The Board found the applicant's inability to recall significant emotional events in his life and relate them to his introduction to Christianity unreasonable. In addition, his inability to acknowledge and verbalize the risks associated with participating in an alleged illegal activity led the Board to question his fear of the agent of persecution.
[21]
The Board also found inconsistencies in the applicant's responses to questions regarding the PSB search for him. This included inconsistent statements in his PIF and his oral testimony on the PSB searching his home and showing his wife an arrest warrant.
[22]
The Board then questioned whether the PSB raid of the underground church occurred as alleged. The Board asked the applicant about the events of the evening when the look-out had warned the church members that the PSB were approaching. The Board noted that the applicant had not seen anyone chasing him, had not heard anyone calling after him and had not seen flashing lights or heard sirens. When asked if the look-out could have made a mistake, the applicant answered affirmatively. Further, contrary to the applicant's testimony, his PIF did not indicate that the PSB had informed his wife of a raid of the church. The Board therefore found it questionable that the PSB raid on the church occurred as alleged.
[23]
The Board also considered the alleged repercussions to the applicant's family in China. At the hearing, the applicant indicated that the PSB continued to visit his wife on a regular basis, most recently on January 15, 2011. The applicant testified that during these visits, the PSB threatened his wife by saying that they would sue her if she concealed information. In addition, neighbours allegedly made fun of his wife due to the frequent PSB visits and his children received"comments from school mates". However, the Board noted that no action had yet been taken against the applicant's wife and his children had not been stopped from going to school. This limited interest by the PSB was contrary to documentary evidence that indicated that reprisals against family members were common where persons of interest to the PSB were unavailable for interrogation or detention.
[24]
Finally, the Board considered the copies of jail release notification, jail visiting card and sentence verdict of individuals associated with the applicant's underground church. The Board noted that these documents were not originals, were of poor quality and were not notarized. The Board also noted documentary evidence indicating that although fake Chinese passports are rare, other documents are assumed to be fraudulent unless proven otherwise. In addition, no reporting of these alleged arrests was provided in the country evidence for 2006, 2007 or 2009. The Board therefore gave little evidentiary weight to these documents.
Serious Possibility of Persecution
[25]
After assessing the applicant's credibility, the Board turned to the question of whether there was a serious possibility that the applicant would be persecuted for practicing Christianity in the Fujian Province. In assessing this question, the Board first considered the applicant's identity and found sufficient evidence on which to find that he was a Christian.
[26]
The Board then noted country evidence that described Christians in the Fujian Province as "enjoy[ing] one of the most liberal polici[ies] on religious freedom in China". It stated that it had reviewed all the documentary evidence submitted and had found no reported arrests or persecution of Christians in the Fujian Province in any of the reports from 2005 to 2009. The Board noted that not all cases of persecution and religious oppression are reported, however, there was no persuasive evidence of recent arrests or incidents in the Fujian Province. The sole document pertaining to the destruction of churches  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Province contained little detail on the reasons for destruction, what occurred and when. Therefore, the Board did not grant this document any weight as evidence of persecution of members of underground churches. Finally, the Board noted documentary evidence that explained that only gatherings of believers of forty or more people were required by law to register with the government.
[27]
Having considered the applicant's description of the small membership of his underground church, the lack of evidence of religious persecution in the Fujian Province and the applicant's PIF and testimony, the Board found that on a balance of probabilities the underground church had never been raided. The applicant was therefore not wanted by the PSB for that reason. Further, the Board found that there was no serious possibility that the applicant would be persecuted if he returned home and sought to practice his religion in the Christian congregation of his choosing.
[28]
For these reasons, the Board rejected the applicant's claims for Convention refugee status and as a person in need of protection.
[29]
The applicant submits the following point at issue:
1. Was the Board's conclusion that the applicant could return to Fujian Province, China to continue to practice his Christian religion reasonable?
[30]
I would rephrase the issues as follows:
1. What is the appropriate standard of review?
2. Did the Board err in its assessment of the evidence and more particularly, in its assessment of the objective risk that the applicant faced should he return to the Fujian Province and practice his faith openly there?
Applicant's Written Submissions
[31]
This application is based on the Board's assessment of the objective risk faced by the applicant in the Fujian Province.
[32]
The applicant submits that the Board erred in its conclusion on the objective risk element of his refugee claim. This error was based on the Board's unreasonable finding that there was no evidence of incidents of arrest or persecution for religious reasons in the Fujian Province. Specifically, the Board failed to consider the evidence of house churches being destroyed in that province. The Board did acknowledge this evidence but refused to attach any weight to it because it found inadequate details regarding the event, reasons and timing of the destruction. The applicant submits that it was unreasonable for the Board to refuse to consider this evidence as evidence of religious persecution in the Fujian Province.
[33]
The applicant submits that the title of the documentary evidence provides the context of the destruction of house churches in the Fujian Province. In addition, the applicant submits that the Board erred by relying on the China Aid Association (CAA) report for 2010. The destructions were reported in the CAA's 2007 report.
[34]
In summary, the applicant submits that the Board erred by refusing to consider the documentary evidence of destruction of Christian churches in the Fujian Province. In support, the applicant refers to
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2011] FCJ No 74 in which it submits this Court held that the destruction of house churches in the Fujian Province constitutes an infringement on the right to freedom of religion.
Respondent's Written Submissions
[35]
The respondent submits that the standard of review for questions of mixed fact and law are assessed on a reasonableness standard.
[36]
The respondent submits that on refugee claims, applicants bear the onus of establishing a well-founded fear of persecution. In this case, the applicant's submissions rely on the Board's weighing of the evidence.
[37]
In its decision, the Board considered the documentary evidence but found no persuasive evidence of recent arrests or persecutions of Christians in the Fujian Province. The Board did consider both the CAA 2007 report and
Liang
above. However, more recent evidence did not mention church destructions in the Fujian Province. Had these incidents continued in this province, they would likely have been included in the recent reports.
[38]
In summary, the respondent submits that the Board's decision was reasonable.
Analysis and Decision
[39]
Issue 1
What is the appropriate standard of review?
Where previous jurisprudence has determined the standard of review applicable to a particular issue before the court, the reviewing court may adopt that standard (see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at paragraph 57).
[40]
It is established jurisprudence that the treatment of evidence is a question of fact that is within the expertise of the Board. In considering whether the Board ignored material evidence or incorrectly dismissed the probative value of certain documents, the applicable standard of review is therefore reasonableness (see <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> above, at paragraphs 51 and 53;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2010] FCJ No 1577 at paragraph 13; and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2011] FCJ No 1174 at paragraph 21).
[41]
In reviewing the Board's decision on the standard of reasonableness, the Court should not intervene unless the Board came to a conclusion that is not transparent, justifiable and intelligible and within the range of acceptable outcomes based on the evidence before it (see <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> above, at paragraph 47; and
Canada (Citizenship and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2009] SCJ No 12 at paragraph 59). As the Supreme Court held in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> above, it is not up to a reviewing court to substitute its own view of a preferable outcome, nor is it the function of the reviewing court to reweigh the evidence (at paragraphs 59 and 61).
[42]
Issue 2
Did the Board err in its assessment of the evidence, and more particularly, in its assessment of the objective risk that the applicant faced should he return to the Fujian Province and practice his faith openly there?
In this case, the applicant submits that the Board erred in its assessment of the objective risk faced by the applicant should he return to the Fujian Province and openly practice his Christian faith there. The task before the Court is assessing this question and was recently explained by Mr. Justice Robert Mainville in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2010] FCJ No 409 at paragraph 22:
Concerning the conditions for the practice of the Christian faith in small house churches in China, it is not the function of this Court to reassesses the available documentation on country conditions. This Court must rather ensure that the Panel has examined whether the Applicant might encounter religious persecution if sent back to China, and second, it must also ensure that the Panel's conclusions in this regard are reasonable, i.e. fall within a range of possible, acceptable outcomes which are defensible in respect of the facts and law.
[43]
In support of its argument, the applicant relies on the Board's treatment of evidence documenting arrests or persecution in the Fujian Province.
[44]
In its decision, the Board stated that it reviewed all the documentary evidence submitted for the applicant's claim. It cited a number of documents, noting differential treatment of religious freedom across China. With regards to the applicant's home province, the Board found no reported arrests or persecution of Christians in the Fujian Province in any of the reports from 2005 to 2009. Nevertheless, it did acknowledge that not all cases of persecution and religious oppression that occur in China are reported. However, the Board found no persuasive evidence of recent arrests or incidents in the Fujian Province in any of the documentation.
[45]
The applicant submits that the Board erred in its treatment of the following documents:
1. RIR12.5:
China: Reports of raids on Protestant house churches; frequency and location of raids (2005 - 2007)
, Response to Information Request, Item 12.5, CHN102492.E. 22 June 2007; and
2. RIR12.10:
Annual Report of Persecution by the Government on Christian House Churches Within Mainland China: January 2009 - December 2009
, Response to Information Request, Item 12.10, CAA. January 2010.
[46]
The applicant submits that the Board erred by not giving any weight to RIR12.5 solely because that report did not mention the reasons for destruction of the church or what occurred and when. The applicant submits that the document's title alone provides the necessary context, namely, the destruction of house churches in the Fujian Province. In addition, the applicant submits that the Board erred in not finding any mention of church destructions in the Fujian Province in RIR12.10. The title of this report and its inclusion under the heading of Religion in the Board's own country evidence negates the Board's speculation that the churches may have been destroyed due to zoning, planning or permitting issues. Further, although the destruction of house churches in the Fujian Province was not mentioned in RIR12.10, it was mentioned in the earlier RIR12.5 report.
[47]
These documents must be reviewed to assess the applicant's allegations. However, it is important to bear in mind that this Court's role is not to re-weigh the evidence and substitute its own view (see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2009] FCJ No 1391 at paragraph 23; and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2011] F.C.J. No. 1129 at paragraph 18). As I explained in
Yao
above, "[i] t is the Board's prerogative to rely on some evidence over others"(at paragraph 18).
[48]
In RIR12.5 it was noted that following the introduction of China's
Regulations on Religious Affairs
in March 2005, there was a crackdown on house churches in parts of the country. The general focus of the raids was on large-scale house church meetings, however, small gatherings with a handful of members were also targeted in some areas. Arrests were noted in several provinces, but the treatment of house churches by government officials was found to vary significantly by region. In the Fujian Province, the report noted that "[t] here were also reports of house churches being destroyed". This statement was based on CAA's
Annual Report on Persecution of Chinese House Churches by Province: From January 2006 to December 2006
. The sole incident reported for Fujian Province in this latter report was the destruction of one house church in Pingtan in 2006.
[49]
In the RIR12.10 report, CAA noted that the Chinese government pursued more intense and strategic persecution of Christians in the house church movement in 2009, changing its policy to terminating church worship meetings and harshly punishing church leaders (pages 8 and 11). As in past years, persecution of Christians and churches was mostly directed against the house church movement and was more serious in urban than in rural areas (pages 9 and 11). The government began forcing churches to quit holding meetings by, amongst other means, destroying church buildings (page 12). Incidents of persecution were noted in numerous provinces and municipalities, however, none were mentioned for the Fujian Province (pages 30 and 31).
[50]
In considering the documentary country evidence before it, the Board noted that there was little reporting of recent arrests or incidents of persecution of Christians in the Fujian Province. The Board acknowledged the destruction of churches in the Fujian Province reported in RIR12.5 but refused to place any weight on this document because it did not mention the reason for the destruction and provided no detail as to what occurred and when. The Board found that the destruction could therefore have been for a "zoning, planning or permitting" reason. The Board also noted that there had been no mention of church destruction in the Fujian Province in CAA's more recent report for 2009 (i.e. RIR12.10).
[51]
Although no details on the 2006 church destruction in the Fujian Province were provided in the 2006 CAA report, I find the Board's questioning of the reason for this incident somewhat puzzling. The close timeline between the incident and the enactment of China's
Regulations on Religious Affairs
in 2005, coupled with the number of other incidents reported across the country at that time, all of which were reported in the documentary evidence before the Board, suggests that the church destruction was more likely caused by religious persecution than by "zoning, planning or permitting" issues. Nevertheless, the Board did consider more recent evidence including RIR12.10 that reported on incidents of persecution in 2009 and found no evidence of recent incidents  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Province.
[52]
It is notable that the applicant relies on the Board's treatment of only two documents. However, along with these reports, the Board also referred to many other documents in its finding of no evidence of recent religious persecutions in the Fujian Province. As in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2010] FCJ No 363, the Board noted both the paucity of documentary evidence on religious persecution in the Fujian Province and that the recognized factors placing people at greater risk of persecution were not present in the applicant's case (at paragraph 34).
[53]
I therefore find that when read as a whole, the Board's questioning of the details of the 2006 incident does not render its decision unreasonable. The Board carried out a detailed assessment of the available documentation and issued reasonable reasons in support of its findings. I do not find that the Board selectively relied on evidence to support its negative determination, rather, it provided adequate justification for rejecting the older evidence. As in
Yu
above, the absence of reported incidents of church raids in the Fujian Province can reasonably lead to an inference that an applicant's church was never raided (at paragraph 32).
[54]
Reviewed as a whole, I find that the Board's decision falls within the range of possible acceptable outcomes that are defensible in respect of the facts and the law. For these reasons, I would dismiss this judicial review.
[55]
Neither party wished to submit a proposed serious question of general importance for my consideration for certification.
JUDGMENT
[56]
THIS COURT'S JUDGMENT is that
the application for judicial review is dismissed.
ANNEX
Relevant Statutory Provisions
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act
, SC 2001, c 27
72. (1) Judicial review by the Federal Court with respect to any matter - a decision, determination or order made, a measure taken or a question raised - under this Act is commenced by making an application for leave to the Court.
96. A Convention refugee is a person who, by reason of a well-founded fear of persecution for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group or political opinion,
(a) is outside each of their countries of nationality and is unable or, by reason of that fear, unwilling to avail themself of the protection of each of those countries; or
(b) not having a country of nationality, is outside the country of their former habitual residence and is unable or, by reason of that fear, unwilling to return to that country.
97. (1) A person in need of protection is a person in Canada whose removal to their country or countries of nationality or, if they do not have a country of nationality, their country of former habitual residence, would subject them personally
(a) to a danger, believed on substantial grounds to exist, of torture within the meaning of Article 1 of the Convention Against Torture; or
(b) to a risk to their life or to a risk of cruel and unusual treatment or punishment if
(i) the person is unable or, because of that risk, unwilling to avail themself of the protection of that country,
(ii) the risk would be faced by the person in every part of that country and is not faced generally by other individuals in or from that country,
(iii) the risk is not inherent or incidental to lawful sanctions, unless imposed in disregard of accepted international standards, and
(iv) the risk is not caused by the inability of that country to provide adequate health or medical care.
72. (1) Le contrôle judiciaire par la Cour fédérale de toute mesure - décision, ordonnance, question ou affaire - prise dans le cadre de la présente loi est subordonné au dépôt d'une demande d'autorisation.
96. A qualité de réfugié au sens de la Convention - le réfugié - la personne qui, craignant avec raison d'être persécutée du fait de sa race, de sa religion, de sa nationalité, de son appartenance à un groupe social ou de ses opinions politiques:
a) soit se trouve hors de tout pays dont elle a la nationalité et ne peut ou, du fait de cette crainte, ne veut se réclamer de la protection de chacun de ces pays;
b) soit, si elle n'a pas de nationalité et se trouve hors du pays dans lequel elle avait sa résidence habituelle, ne peut ni, du fait de cette crainte, ne veut y retourner.
97. (1) A qualité de personne à protéger la personne qui se trouve au Canada et serait personnellement, par son renvoi vers tout pays dont elle a la nationalité ou, si elle n'a pas de nationalité, dans lequel elle avait sa résidence habituelle, exposée:
a) soit au risque, s'il y a des motifs sérieux de le croire, d'être soumise à la torture au sens de l'article premier de la Convention contre la torture;
b) soit à une menace à sa vie ou au risque de traitements ou peines cruels et inusités dans le cas suivant:
(i) elle ne peut ou, de ce fait, ne veut se réclamer de la protection de ce pays,
(ii) elle y est exposée en tout lieu de ce pays alors que d'autres personnes originaires de ce pays ou qui s'y trouvent ne le sont généralement pas,
(iii) la menace ou le risque ne résulte pas de sanctions légitimes - sauf celles infligées au mépris des normes internationales - et inhérents à celles-ci ou occasionnés par elles,
(iv) la menace ou le risque ne résulte pas de l'incapacité du pays de fournir des soins médicaux ou de santé adéquats.
.........................
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  s'agit d'une demande de contrôle judiciaire, présentée en vertu du paragraphe 72(1) de la
Loi sur l'immigration et la protection des réfugiés
, LC 2001, ch 27 (la Loi), de la décision de la Section de la protection des réfugiés de la Commission de l'immigration et du statut de réfugié (la Commission), datée du 9 mai 2011, qui a statué que le demandeur n'avait pas qualité de réfugié au sens de la Convention selon l'article 96 de la Loi et qu'il n'avait pas non plus qualité de personne à protéger au sens du paragraphe 97(1) de la Loi.
[2]
Cette conclusion était fondée sur la conclusion de la Commission selon laquelle le demandeur n'était pas crédible et qu'il n'existait pas une possibilité sérieuse que le demandeur soit persécuté pour pratique de sa religion et participation au culte dans une église chrétienne s'il était renvoyé à son domicile dans la province chinoise du Fujian.
[3]
Le demandeur demande à la Cour de délivrer un bref de
certiorari
cassant la décision de la Commission et un bref de
mandamus
obligeant cette dernière à lui accorder une nouvelle audience.
Contexte
[4]
Le demandeur, Shoupeng Wei, un citoyen de la République populaire de Chine (Chine), vit dans la province du Fujian et il pratique la religion chrétienne. Il est marié et père d'un fils et d'une fille. Les membres de sa famille sont demeurés en Chine.
[5]
En juin 2005, la santé du demandeur a commencé à se détériorer. Il a consulté des médecins, mais ces derniers ont été incapables de découvrir de quelle maladie il souffrait. Le demandeur s'est confié à son ami Liu Zhong, qui lui a parlé de la foi chrétienne. Après que le demandeur et son ami eurent prié pour sa guérison, l'état de santé du demandeur a commencé à s'améliorer.
[6]
Le 7 août 2005, le demandeur a participé pour la première fois à un office religieux d'une église clandestine. Les membres de cette église, environ 13 personnes, se réunissaient secrètement aux domiciles de deux des fidèles. Au cours de l'office, des guetteurs surveillaient la venue potentielle de membres du bureau de la sécurité publique (BSP). Le 26 février 2006, le demandeur a été baptisé et, le mois suivant, il a recruté son ami Chen Jin.
[7]
Le 13 avril 2006, l'office qui était célébré par l'église clandestine a été interrompu par un guetteur qui annonçait l'arrivée de membres du BSP. Craignant d'être arrêté, le demandeur s'est caché dans la maison de sa belle-sœur. Deux jours plus tard, des membres du BSP ont effectué une perquisition à la maison du demandeur. Ils ont dit à sa femme qu'ils étaient au courant de ses activités religieuses illégales et se sont informés au sujet de ses allées et venues. La femme du demandeur leur a affirmé qu'elle ne savait rien à ce sujet. Le BSP lui a fait savoir que le demandeur devait se rendre immédiatement et il a exigé que sa femme leur transmette tout renseignement qu'elle obtenait à son sujet. Le 18 avril 2006, le demandeur a appris que trois membres de son église clandestine avaient été arrêtés au cours de la descente du BSP.
[8]
Après avoir vécu neuf mois dans la clandestinité, le demandeur a trouvé un passeur avec l'aide de sa belle-sœur. Celui-ci lui a fourni un visa canadien et l'a accompagné jusqu'au Canada. Le 13 janvier 2007, le demandeur est arrivé au Canada. Il y a demandé l'asile le 26 janvier 2007.
[9]
Dans son formulaire de renseignements personnels (FRP) daté de mars 2007, le demandeur a déclaré que le BSP était encore à sa recherche et que des membres de cette organisation s'étaient rendus à son domicile à plusieurs reprises. De plus, selon le demandeur, les trois membres de son église clandestine qui avaient été arrêtés demeuraient en détention dans l'attente du prononcé de leur peine.
[10]
La demande d'asile du demandeur avait déjà été instruite par un autre tribunal de la Section de la protection des réfugiés. Le tribunal avait rejeté la demande pour non-crédibilité. Lors du contrôle judiciaire, le juge Michel Beaudry a annulé cette décision parce qu'il estimait que la Commission avait commis deux erreurs susceptibles de révision qui étaient au cœur de la demande du demandeur (voir
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2010] ACF no832).
[11]
La nouvelle audience relative à la demande d'asile du demandeur a eu lieu le 25 janvier et le 27 avril 2011.
Décision de la Commission
[12]
La Commission a rendu publique sa décision le 9 mai 2011. Il est à noter que la décision faisait suite à une nouvelle audience, comme l'avait ordonné la Cour fédérale dans
Wei
, ci-dessus.
[13]
La Commission a abordé deux questions principales dans sa décision: la crédibilité du demandeur et la question de savoir s'il existait une possibilité véritable que le demandeur soit persécuté s'il pratiquait la religion chrétienne dans la province du Fujian. L'évaluation qu'a faite la Commission relativement à ces deux questions est décrite ci-après. Cependant, l'évaluation de la crédibilité du demandeur par la Commission n'a pas été contestée en l'espèce. La présente demande porte uniquement sur l'évaluation qu'a effectuée la Commission relativement à la seconde question.
Crédibilité
[14]
La Commission a d'abord reconnu que la preuve établissait que le demandeur était bien un citoyen de la Chine. La Commission a souligné qu'elle avait tenu compte de l'âge, des études et des antécédents du demandeur pour évaluer sa crédibilité. Elle a pris en compte son niveau d'études (cinquième année du cours primaire), les difficultés que comporte la participation à une audience et la tension qu'entraîne l'obligation de communiquer par l'intermédiaire d'un interprète. Reconnaissant l'existence de ces obstacles, la Commission a expliqué qu'elle avait accordé au demandeur de nombreuses possibilités de répondre aux questions tout au long de l'audience.
[15]
La Commission a constaté que le demandeur témoignait fréquemment « de façon vague, évasive et confuse » sur des aspects importants de sa demande d'asile. De plus, elle a estimé que le témoignage du demandeur était « changeant, incohérent et vague ». La Commission a aussi établi que d'importants détails portant sur des questions clés de sa demande d'asile avaient été omis dans son FRP et l'exposé circonstancié qui y est joint.
[16]
La Commission a estimé que la question de la crédibilité était déterminante en l'espèce et, plus précisément, la crédibilité qui se dégageait de l'exposé circonstancié joint au FRP du demandeur de même que celle se dégageant de son témoignage de vive voix relativement à son appartenance à une église clandestine et ses démêlés avec le BSP.
[17]
Pour arriver à cette conclusion défavorable sur la crédibilité du demandeur, la Commission a tiré des inférences défavorables de son témoignage et de ses observations sur les points suivants:
1. L'information que l'ami du demandeur lui avait transmise au sujet du christianisme.
2. La maladie du demandeur.
3. Les débuts de la participation du demandeur aux activités de l'église clandestine.
4. Le fait que des membres du BSP soient à la recherche du demandeur.
5. La descente du BSP dans un des lieux de culte de l'église.
6. Les répercussions de la situation sur les membres de la famille du demandeur en Chine.
7. L'avis de mise en liberté, la carte de visite de la prison et la copie du prononcé de la peine.
[18]
La Commission a souligné que le demandeur n'avait pas répondu lorsqu'il a été interrogé sur les sujets qu'il avait abordés avec l'ami de qui il a entendu parler pour la première fois du christianisme. Cependant, lorsqu'il lui a été demandé de confirmer des réponses figurant dans son FRP, le demandeur a répondu par l'affirmative. La Commission a tiré une inférence défavorable de l'incapacité du demandeur de se souvenir avec précision de renseignements sur une expérience qui avait changé sa vie.
[19]
Deuxièmement, la Commission a constaté une incohérence entre les renseignements fournis au sujet de la maladie alléguée du demandeur. Dans son FRP, il a déclaré qu'il souffrait d'un mal non diagnostiqué alors qu'il est précisé dans les documents médicaux annexés à sa demande qu'il souffrait de gastrite. Tenant compte du niveau d'études du demandeur, la Commission a demandé à ce dernier s'il comprenait le sens du mot diagnostic. La Commission a constaté que le demandeur avait fourni une définition claire de ce terme et qu'il semblait aussi connaître d'autres termes médicaux. La Commission en a donc conclu que le demandeur n'avait pas fourni une explication raisonnable pour justifier la contradiction entre le contenu de son FRP et la preuve documentaire.
[20]
Se reportant au mois d'août 2005, soit lorsque le demandeur a commencé à participer aux offices de l'église clandestine, la Commission a demandé au demandeur s'il était conscient des répercussions de sa participation aux activités de cette église. Le demandeur a répondu qu'il n'avait pas réfléchi aux répercussions à l'époque et que son ami ne lui avait pas parlé de l'existence de quelque problème que ce soit. La Commission a aussi interrogé le demandeur au sujet d'autres événements importants qui s'étaient produits dans sa famille au cours de cette période. Après avoir tenté d'obtenir des réponses claires à plusieurs questions exploratoires, la Commission a finalement demandé au demandeur de parler du décès de son père (juillet 2005) et de la naissance de son fils (août 2005). Le demandeur est devenu émotif au moment où il a été interrogé au sujet de son père et il a confirmé par la suite que le christianisme l'avait aidé à accepter son décès. Interrogé sur les motifs pour lesquels il n'avait pas mentionné ce fait dans son FRP, le demandeur a expliqué que le consultant ne lui avait pas posé de questions à ce sujet. La Commission a estimé que l'incapacité du demandeur de se rappeler d'importants événements émouvants de sa vie et de les relier à sa conversion au christianisme n'était pas raisonnable. De plus, son incapacité de reconnaître et de décrire les risques associés à la participation à une activité prétendument illégale a amené la Commission à douter de sa crainte de l'agent de persécution.
[21]
La Commission a aussi constaté l'existence d'incohérences dans les réponses du demandeur à des questions concernant les recherches entreprises par le BSP pour le retrouver. Il s'agit notamment de déclarations contradictoires dans son FRP et au cours de son témoignage de vive voix sur la perquisition du BSP à son domicile et sur le fait que les agents de ce dernier auraient montré un mandat d'arrestation à sa femme.
[22]
La Commission a ensuite mis en doute la véracité de la description de la descente du BSP dans les locaux de l'église clandestine. La Commission a demandé au demandeur de fournir plus de renseignements au sujet des événements survenus le soir où le guetteur avait averti les fidèles que des membres du BSP s'approchaient des lieux. La Commission a pris note du fait que le demandeur n'avait vu personne le suivre, n'avait entendu personne l'appeler et qu'il n'avait ni vu de lumières clignoter ni entendu de sirènes. Interrogé au sujet de la possibilité que le guetteur ait pu commettre une erreur, le demandeur a répondu par l'affirmative. De plus, contrairement au témoignage du demandeur, son FRP ne précisait pas que le BSP avait informé sa femme de la descente dans les locaux de l'église. La Commission a donc mis en doute la version que donnait le demandeur de la descente du BSP dans les locaux de l'église.
[23]
La Commission a aussi examiné les répercussions alléguées pour les membres de la famille du demandeur en Chine. À l'audience, le demandeur a déclaré que les membres du BSP étaient allés régulièrement rencontrer sa femme, la dernière fois le 15 janvier 2011. Le demandeur a ajouté que, lors de ces visites, les membres du BSP menaçaient sa femme en disant qu'ils la poursuivraient si elle cachait des renseignements. De plus, les voisins auraient ri de sa femme à cause des visites fréquentes de membres du BSP chez elle et ses enfants auraient reçu [traduction] « des commentaires de la part de camarades de classe ». Cependant, la Commission a souligné qu'aucune mesure n'avait encore été prise contre la femme du demandeur et que ses enfants fréquentaient encore l'école. Cet intérêt restreint du BSP à l'égard de sa famille ne correspond pas à la preuve documentaire selon laquelle les représailles contre les membres de la famille sont fréquentes lorsque le BSP ne peut interroger ou détenir des personnes qu'il recherche.
[24]
Enfin, la Commission a examiné les copies de l'avis de mise en liberté, de la carte de visite de prison et du prononcé de la peine de personnes associées à l'église clandestine du demandeur. La Commission a constaté que ces documents n'étaient pas des originaux, qu'ils étaient de qualité médiocre et qu'ils n'étaient pas notariés. La Commission a aussi souligné que la preuve documentaire révélait que même si les faux passeports chinois sont rares, il faut présumer que les autres documents sont des faux, à moins de preuve du contraire. De plus, ces arrestations alléguées n'ont pas été mentionnées dans les rapports nationaux sur la Chine pour 2006, 2007 ou 2009. La Commission a donc accordé peu de valeur probante à ces documents.
Possibilité sérieuse de persécution
[25]
Après avoir évalué la crédibilité du demandeur, la Commission a cherché à savoir s'il existait une possibilité sérieuse que le demandeur soit persécuté parce qu'il pratiquait la religion chrétienne dans la province du Fujian. Dans son examen de cette question, la Commission a d'abord vérifié l'identité du demandeur et a trouvé suffisamment d'éléments de preuve qui lui ont permis de conclure qu'il est chrétien.
[26]
La Commission a ensuite cité le rapport national selon lequel les chrétiens de la province du Fujian [traduction] « bénéficient de l'une des politiques les plus libérales en matière de liberté de religieuse en Chine ». La Commission a dit avoir passé en revue toute la preuve documentaire soumise et n'avoir rien lu sur des arrestations ou la persécution de chrétiens dans la province du Fujian dans les rapports de 2005 à 2009. La Commission a souligné cependant que tous les cas de persécution et d'oppression pour des motifs religieux ne sont pas signalés; par contre, il n'existait aucun élément de preuve convaincant d'arrestations ou d'incidents récents dans la province du Fujian. Le seul document relatif à la destruction d'églises dans la province du Fujian n'énonçait pas de motifs justifiant ces destructions ni aucun détail à propos de ce qui s'est produit et du moment où elles ont eu lieu. Par conséquent, la Commission n'a accordé aucune valeur probante à ce document comme preuve de la persécution de membres d'églises clandestines. Enfin, la Commission a fait état d'une preuve documentaire expliquant que seuls les rassemblements de plus de 40 personnes doivent être enregistrés auprès du gouvernement.
[27]
Après avoir pris en compte la description faite par le demandeur du petit nombre de fidèles appartenant à cette église clandestine, l'absence d'éléments de preuve confirmant l'existence d'une persécution religieuse dans la province du Fujian de même que le FRP et le témoignage du demandeur, la Commission a estimé que, selon la prépondérance des probabilités, l'église clandestine en question n'avait jamais fait l'objet d'une descente. Elle a donc conclu que le demandeur n'était pas recherché par le BSP pour cette raison. De plus, la Commission a estimé qu'il n'existait pas de possibilité sérieuse que le demandeur soit persécuté s'il retournait chez lui et qu'il cherchait à pratiquer la religion chrétienne dans l'église de son choix.
[28]
Pour ces motifs, la Commission a refusé la demande d'asile du demandeur qui souhaitait que lui soit reconnue la qualité de réfugié au sens de la Convention et de personne à protéger.
[29]
Le demandeur demande à la Cour de se prononcer sur les questions suivantes:
1. La conclusion de la Commission selon laquelle le demandeur pourrait retourner dans la province du Fujian, en Chine, pour continuer à y pratiquer la religion chrétienne est-elle raisonnable?
[30]
Je reformulerais comme suit les questions en jeu:
1. Quelle est la norme de contrôle applicable?
2. La Commission a-t-elle commis une erreur dans son évaluation de la preuve et, plus précisément, dans son évaluation du risque objectif auquel le demandeur serait exposé s'il retournait dans la province du Fujian et y pratiquait ouvertement sa religion?
Observations écrites du demandeur
[31]
La présente demande porte sur l'évaluation par la Commission du risque objectif que doit affronter le demandeur dans la province du Fujian.
[32]
Le demandeur allègue que la Commission a commis une erreur dans ses conclusions sur la composante de risque objectif de sa demande d'asile. Cette erreur proviendrait de la conclusion déraisonnable de la Commission selon laquelle il n'existait pas d'éléments de preuve d'arrestations ou de persécutions pour des motifs religieux dans la province du Fujian. Plus précisément, la Commission aurait omis de tenir compte des éléments de preuve montrant que des maisons-églises avaient été détruites dans cette province. La Commission a reconnu l'existence de ces éléments de preuve, mais a refusé de leur accorder une valeur probante étant donné qu'elle a jugé inadéquates les données concernant ces destructions pouvant expliquer ce qui s'est produit et le moment où elles ont eu lieu. Le demandeur soutient que la Commission a agi de façon déraisonnable en refusant de considérer ces éléments de preuve comme la démonstration de l'existence d'une persécution religieuse dans la province du Fujian.
[33]
Selon le demandeur, le titre du document fournit le contexte de la destruction d'églises installées dans des maisons dans la province du Fujian. De plus, selon le demandeur, la Commission a commis une erreur en s'appuyant sur le rapport de la China Aid Association (CAA) pour 2010. En effet, les destructions ont été mentionnées dans le rapport 2007 de la CAA.
[34]
En résumé, le demandeur soutient que la Commission a commis une erreur en refusant de tenir compte de la preuve documentaire de la destruction d'églises chrétiennes dans la province du Fujian. À l'appui de ses allégations, le demandeur invoque la décision
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2011] ACF no74, dans laquelle la Cour a établi, selon le demandeur, que la destruction de maisons-églises dans la province du Fujian porte atteinte au droit à la liberté de religion.
Observations écrites du défendeur
[35]
Le défendeur soutient que la norme de contrôle des questions mixtes de fait et de droit est celle de la décision raisonnable.
[36]
Le défendeur allègue que dans les cas de demande d'asile, il incombe aux demandeurs de démontrer qu'ils craignent avec raison d'être persécutés. En l'espèce, les observations du demandeur concernent l'évaluation de la preuve qu'a effectuée la Commission.
[37]
Dans sa décision, la Commission a tenu compte de la preuve documentaire, mais elle a jugé que cette dernière ne constituait pas une preuve convaincante d'arrestations ou de persécutions récentes de chrétiens dans la province du Fujian. La Commission a pris connaissance à la fois du rapport 2007 de la CAA et de la décision
Liang
, ci-dessus. Cependant, des éléments de preuve plus récents ne faisaient pas état de destructions d'églises dans la province du Fujian. Si ces incidents s'étaient poursuivis dans cette province, ils auraient probablement été mentionnés dans les rapports récents.
[38]
En résumé, le défendeur soutient que la décision de la Commission était raisonnable.
Analyse et décision
[39]
Première question
Quelle est la norme de contrôle applicable?
Lorsque la jurisprudence a établi la norme de contrôle applicable à une question donnée, le tribunal chargé du contrôle d'une décision peut adopter cette norme (voir
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , au paragraphe 57).
[40]
Il est bien établi par la jurisprudence que le traitement des éléments de preuve est une question de fait qui relève de l'expertise de la Commission. En ce qui concerne la question de savoir si la Commission a laissé de côté des éléments de preuve importants ou a nié à tort la valeur probante de certains documents, la norme de contrôle applicable est donc celle de la raisonnabilité (voir <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , ci-dessus, aux paragraphes 51 et 53;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2010] ACF no 1577, au paragraphe 13; et
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2011] ACF no 1174, au paragraphe 21).
[41]
Dans son examen de la décision de la Commission selon le critère de la raisonnabilité, la Cour ne doit intervenir que si la Commission n'a pas pris une décision justifiée, si elle n'a pas suivi un processus décisionnel transparent et intelligible et si ses décisions n'appartenaient pas aux issues possibles acceptables pouvant se justifier au regard de la preuve dont elle disposait (voir <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , ci-dessus, au paragraphe 47; et
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2009] ACS no 12, au paragraphe 59). Comme la Cour suprême l'a établi dans l'arrêt <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , ci-dessus, il ne revient pas aux cours de révision de substituer la solution qu'elles jugent elles-mêmes appropriée à celle qui a été retenue et elles n'ont pas non plus à soupeser à nouveau les éléments de preuve (aux paragraphes 59 et 61).
[42]
Deuxième question
La Commission a-t-elle commis une erreur dans son évaluation de la preuve et, plus précisément, dans son évaluation du risque objectif auquel le demandeur serait exposé s'il retournait dans la province du Fujian et y pratiquait ouvertement sa religion?
En l'espèce, le demandeur soutient que la Commission a commis une erreur dans son évaluation du risque objectif auquel le demandeur serait exposé s'il retournait dans la province du Fujian et y pratiquait ouvertement la religion chrétienne. La tâche qui incombe à la Cour, soit l'évaluation de cette question, a été expliquée récemment par le juge  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2010] ACF no 409, au paragraphe 22:
Quant aux conditions dans lesquelles on exerce la foi chrétienne dans les petites églises-maisons en Chine, il n'appartient pas à la Cour de réévaluer la documentation disponible sur les conditions qui règnent dans ce pays. La Cour doit plutôt s'assurer que le tribunal a vérifié si le demandeur risque d'être persécuté sur le plan religieux s'il est renvoyé en Chine et, ensuite, si les conclusions du tribunal à cet égard sont raisonnables, c'est-à-dire qu'elles appartiennent aux issues possibles acceptables qui peuvent se justifier au regard des faits et du droit.
[43]
À l'appui de son argument, le demandeur s'appuie sur le traitement qu'a fait la Commission de la preuve décrivant les arrestations ou les persécutions dans la province du Fujian.
[44]
Dans sa décision, la Commission a déclaré avoir passé en revue toute la preuve documentaire présentée à l'appui de la demande d'asile du demandeur. Elle a cité un certain nombre de documents et a souligné le degré variable de la liberté religieuse en Chine. En ce qui concerne la province d'origine du demandeur, la Commission n'a vu dans aucun des rapports de 2005 à 2009 de mention d'arrestations ou de persécutions de chrétiens dans la province du Fujian. Néanmoins, elle a reconnu que les cas de persécution et d'oppression religieuses en Chine ne sont pas tous déclarés. Cependant, la Commission n'a trouvé dans l'ensemble des documents présenté aucune preuve convaincante d'arrestations ou d'incidents récents dans la province du Fujian.
[45]
Selon le demandeur, la Commission a commis des erreurs dans son traitement des documents suivants:
1. RDI12.5:
Chine: Information sur les descentes dans les maisons-églises protestantes; fréquence et lieu des descentes (2005-2007)
, réponse à une demande d'information 12.5, CHN102492.EF. 22 juin 2007; et
2. RDI12.10:
Annual Report of Persecution by the Government on Christian House Churches Within Mainland China: January 2009 - December 2009
, réponse à une demande d'information 12.10, CAA. Janvier 2010.
[46]
Selon le demandeur, la Commission a commis une erreur en n'accordant aucune valeur au document RDI12.5 uniquement parce que le rapport ne mentionnait pas les motifs justifiant les destructions des maisons-églises ni aucun détail à propos de ce qui s'est produit et du moment où elles ont eu lieu. Le demandeur allègue que le titre du document à lui seul fournit le contexte, soit la destruction de maisons-églises dans la province du Fujian. De plus, le demandeur soutient que la Commission a commis une erreur en ne trouvant aucune mention de destruction de maisons-églises de la province du Fujian dans le document RDI12.10. En effet, le titre du rapport et son incorporation sous la rubrique de la religion dans sa propre documentation sur le pays montre l'absence de fondement de l'hypothèse de la Commission selon laquelle les maisons-églises peuvent avoir été détruites à cause de problèmes de zonage, de planification ou de délivrance de permis. De plus, même si la destruction de maisons-églises dans la province du Fujian n'a pas été mentionnée dans le document RDI12.10, elle l'a été dans le rapport antérieur, soit le RDI12.5.
[47]
Il faut prendre connaissance de ces documents afin de valider les allégations du demandeur. Cependant, il est important de se rappeler que le rôle de la Cour n'est pas de soupeser à nouveau la preuve et de substituer son propre point de vue à celui de la  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2009] ACF no 1391, au paragraphe 23; et
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2011] A.C.F. no1129, au paragraphe 18). Comme je l'ai expliqué dans la décision
Yao
, ci-dessus,« la Commission a la prérogative de privilégier certains éléments de preuve par rapport à d'autres » (au paragraphe 18).
[48]
Dans le document RDI12.5, il était précisé qu'après l'adoption, en mars 2005, du règlement sur les affaires religieuses de la Chine, des mesures de répression avaient été prises contre les maisons-églises de certaines régions du pays. Selon le document, les descentes visaient surtout les grandes maisons-églises; cependant, les petites réunions regroupant une poignée de fidèles étaient aussi ciblées dans certaines régions. Des arrestations étaient signalées dans plusieurs provinces, mais le traitement des maisons-églises par les représentants gouvernementaux variait beaucoup d'une région à l'autre. Selon le document, « des sources [avaient] aussi signalé la destruction de maisons-églises ». Ce renseignement était fondé sur le document de la CAA intitulé
Annual Report on Persecution of Chinese House Churches by Province: From January 2006 to December 2006
. Le seul incident signalé pour la province du Fujian dans ce dernier rapport était la destruction d'une maison-église à Pingtan en 2006.
[49]
Dans le rapport RDI12.10, la CAA soulignait que le gouvernement chinois s'adonnait à une persécution plus musclée et plus stratégique des chrétiens du mouvement des maisons-églises en 2009, modifiant sa politique de façon à interrompre les offices religieux et à punir sévèrement les dirigeants de ces églises clandestines (pages 8 et 11). Comme au cours des années précédentes, la persécution des chrétiens et des églises visait principalement le mouvement des maisons-églises et elle était plus marquée dans les régions urbaines que dans les régions rurales (pages 9 et 11). Le gouvernement a commencé à obliger les églises à cesser les rassemblements, notamment en détruisant les immeubles (page 12). Des incidents de persécution ont été signalés dans de nombreuses provinces et municipalités; cependant, aucun n'était mentionné pour la province du Fujian (pages 30 et 31).
[50]
Dans son examen de la preuve documentaire sur la Chine dont elle était saisie, la Commission a souligné que peu d'arrestations ou d'incidents récents de persécution de chrétiens étaient signalés dans la province du Fujian. La Commission a reconnu que des rapports avaient fait état de la destruction de maisons-églises de la province du Fujian dans le document RDI12.5, mais elle a refusé d'accorder une valeur probante à ce document parce qu'il ne mentionnait pas les motifs des destructions et qu'aucun détail n'était fourni à propos de ce qui s'était produit et du moment où les destructions avaient eu lieu. La Commission a estimé que la destruction de ces maisons-églises aurait donc pu être liée à « des questions de zonage, de planification ou de permis ». La Commission a aussi souligné qu'il n'avait pas été question de la destruction de maisons-églises de la province du Fujian dans le plus récent rapport de la CAA pour 2009 (c.-à-d. le document RDI12.10).
[51]
Bien que le rapport 2006 de la CAA n'ait fourni aucun renseignement précis sur la destruction d'une maison-église dans la province du Fujian en 2006, j'estime que les interrogations de la Commission sur les motifs de cet incident laissent quelque peu songeur. La proximité dans le temps entre l'incident et l'adoption par la Chine du règlement sur les affaires religieuses en 2005, de même que le grand nombre d'autres incidents signalés dans l'ensemble du pays à l'époque, tous mentionnés dans la preuve documentaire déposée devant la Commission, donnent à penser que la destruction de cette maison-église a été plus probablement causée par la persécution religieuse que par des « questions de zonage, de planification ou de permis ». Néanmoins, la Commission a tenu compte d'éléments de preuve plus récents, y compris le document RDI12.10, qui signalait des incidents de persécution en 2009, mais elle n'y a trouvé aucune preuve d'incidents récents dans la province du Fujian.
[52]
Il importe de souligner que le demandeur invoque l'examen par la Commission de seulement deux documents. Or, en plus de ces rapports, la Commission a aussi fait état de nombreux autres documents pour établir qu'il n'existait pas de preuve de persécutions religieuses récentes dans la province du  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2010] ACF no 363, la Commission a souligné à la fois le manque de preuve documentaire au sujet de la persécution religieuse dans la province du Fujian et le fait que certains facteurs qui entraînaient un risque plus grand ne se retrouvaient pas dans la situation du demandeur (paragraphe 34).
[53]
J'estime donc que, dans son ensemble, la remise en question par la Commission des modalités de l'incident de 2006 ne rend pas sa décision déraisonnable. En effet, la Commission a effectué une évaluation détaillée de la documentation existante et a fourni des motifs raisonnables à l'appui de ses conclusions. Je ne crois pas que la Commission a choisi des éléments de preuve pour étayer sa décision défavorable; en fait, elle a plutôt justifié adéquatement son rejet des éléments de preuve plus anciens. Comme dans la décision
Yu
, ci-dessus, l'absence de rapports sur des descentes dans des maisons-églises de la province du Fujian peut raisonnablement mener à la conclusion que la maison-église du demandeur n'a jamais fait l'objet d'une descente (paragraphe 32).
[54]
Je conclus que la décision de la Commission, examinée dans son ensemble, appartient aux issues possibles acceptables qui peuvent se justifier au regard des faits et du droit. Pour ces motifs, je suis d'avis de rejeter la demande de contrôle judiciaire.
[55]
Aucune des parties n'a souhaité faire certifier une question grave de portée générale.
JUGEMENT
[56]
LA COUR ORDONNE que
la demande de contrôle judiciaire soit rejetée.
ANNEXE
Dispositions législatives pertinentes
Loi sur l'immigration et la protection des réfugiés
, LC 2001, ch 27
72. (1) Le contrôle judiciaire par la Cour fédérale de toute mesure - décision, ordonnance, question ou affaire - prise dans le cadre de la présente loi est subordonné au dépôt d'une demande d'autorisation.
96. A qualité de réfugié au sens de la Convention - le réfugié - la personne qui, craignant avec raison d'être persécutée du fait de sa race, de sa religion, de sa nationalité, de son appartenance à un groupe social ou de ses opinions politiques:
a
) soit se trouve hors de tout pays dont elle a la nationalité et ne peut ou, du fait de cette crainte, ne veut se réclamer de la protection de chacun de ces pays;
b) soit, si elle n'a pas de nationalité et se trouve hors du pays dans lequel elle avait sa résidence habituelle, ne peut ni, du fait de cette crainte, ne veut y retourner.
97. (1) A qualité de personne à protéger la personne qui se trouve au Canada et serait personnellement, par son renvoi vers tout pays dont elle a la nationalité ou, si elle n'a pas de nationalité, dans lequel elle avait sa résidence habituelle, exposée:
a
) soit au risque, s'il y a des motifs sérieux de le croire, d'être soumise à la torture au sens de l'article premier de la Convention contre la torture;
b) soit à une menace à sa vie ou au risque de traitements ou peines cruels et inusités dans le cas suivant:
(i) elle ne peut ou, de ce fait, ne veut se réclamer de la protection de ce pays,
(ii) elle y est exposée en tout lieu de ce pays alors que d'autres personnes originaires de ce pays ou qui s'y trouvent ne le sont généralement pas,
(iii) la menace ou le risque ne résulte pas de sanctions légitimes - sauf celles infligées au mépris des normes internationales - et inhérents à celles-ci ou occasionnés par elles,
(iv) la menace ou le risque ne résulte pas de l'incapacité du pays de fournir des soins médicaux ou de santé adéquats.
72. (1) Judicial review by the Federal Court with respect to any matter - a decision, determination or order made, a measure taken or a question raised - under this Act is commenced by making an application for leave to the Court.
96. A Convention refugee is a person who, by reason of a well-founded fear of persecution for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group or political opinion,
(a) is outside each of their countries of nationality and is unable or, by reason of that fear, unwilling to avail themself of the protection of each of those countries; or
(b) not having a country of nationality, is outside the country of their former habitual residence and is unable or, by reason of that fear, unwilling to return to that country.
97. (1) A person in need of protection is a person in Canada whose removal to their country or countries of nationality or, if they do not have a country of nationality, their country of former habitual residence, would subject them personally
(a) to a danger, believed on substantial grounds to exist, of torture within the meaning of Article 1 of the Convention Against Torture; or
(b) to a risk to their life or to a risk of cruel and unusual treatment or punishment if
(i) the person is unable or, because of that risk, unwilling to avail themself of the protection of that country,
(ii) the risk would be faced by the person in every part of that country and is not faced generally by other individuals in or from that country,
(iii) the risk is not inherent or incidental to lawful sanctions, unless imposed in disregard of accepted international standards, and
(iv) the risk is not caused by the inability of that country to provide adequate health or medical care.
[End of document]