[1]
Rothstein, J.
: This is an interlocutory motion by Apotex Inc. (Apotex) to dismiss the application for an order prohibiting the Minister of National Health and Welfare from issuing a notice of compliance to Apotex in respect of the drug lovostatin filed by the applicants (Merck) pursuant to s. 6(1) of the
Patented Medicines (Notice of Compliance) Regulations
. Apotex says that it has withdrawn its allegation made under s. 5(1)(b) of the
Regulations
that a certain process whereby the product lovostatin is produced is not infringing of Merck's patent for lovostatin. This allegation formed the substratum for Merck's application for prohibition. With the withdrawal of the allegation, Apotex submits that the prohibition application is moot and should be dismissed.
[2]
A related argument made by Apotex is that the continuation of the prohibition application in the circumstances of this case constitutes an abuse of the process. It is not necessary to deal with this argument.
[3]
The parties agree that the first question to be determined is whether the court may dismiss the prohibition application. Proceedings under the
Patented Medicines (Notice of Compliance) Regulations
are commenced by notice of motion and as such, proceedings may not be struck out or dismissed on an interlocutory application.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 209. However, when an application is so clearly improper as to be bereft of any possibility of success, either under the court's inherent powers or under rule 5, the court may have such jurisdiction.
[4]
This is not such a case. As  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ,
there is an aspect of public law when the court is asked to prohibit the Minister from issuing a notice of compliance. While on its face Apotex makes a compelling argument that when an allegation is withdrawn, a prohibition application is moot, I am not satisfied the case is so clear as to fall into the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> exception. For example, can an allegation be unilaterally withdrawn? Is there overlap between the allegation giving rise to the matter and the notice of compliance sought by Apotex for lovostatin in respect of which there is another allegation and another application in this court for prohibition? I need go no further. The application simply does not meet the exceptional standard set by <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[5]
The application to dismiss is itself dismissed. However, having regard to the importance of expeditious determinations in these matters, I have fixed February 26, 1997 at Toronto for commencement of the hearing on the merits of the application for prohibition in this matter. Apotex may, at the commencement of those proceedings, make a preliminary motion to dismiss the application for prohibition if it chooses to do so.
Motion dismissed.
Editor: Jana A. Andersen/ldl
[End of document]