[1]
Giles, Associate Senior Prothonotary
: Upon motion dated the 14th day of December, 1994 on behalf of the plaintiff for:
1. An Order that the defendants, Goulame Amarsy and Primesco Inc., show cause why they should not be found in contempt of the Order of Associate Chief Justice Jerome of this Honourable Court dated December 5, 1994, because of:
(a) Their continued use of the trademark Herbier De Provence, and the trademarks shown in Schedule 3 of the Order, in contravention of Paragraph 1 iv) of the aforesaid Order; and
(b) Their failure to deliver up to the offices of the solicitors for the plaintiff, Kvas Miller Everitt, under oath, all indoor and outdoor signs, labels, advertising materials, invoices, stationary, bags, products, catalogues and the like, bearing the trademarks Herbier De Province or L'Herbier De Provence, or the trademarks shown in Schedules 1, 2 and 3 of the Order, pursuant to Paragraph 2 of the aforesaid Order;
2. An Order abridging the time for the filing and service of this Motion, pursuant to Federal Court Rules 3(1)(c), 320(1) and 321(2);
3. An Order requiring the defendants, Goulame Amarsy and Catalix S.A. to pay into court all sums of money arising from the sale of goods marked with the trademark Herbier De Provence, after December 7, 1994;
4. The plaintiff's costs on a solicitor and client basis; and
5. Such further and other relief as to this Honourable Court may seem just.
[2]
The motion before me sought an order that the defendants Goulame Amarsy and Primesco Inc. ("the responding defendants") be ordered to attend to show cause why they should not be found in contempt of court. The solicitors for the responding defendants filed written submissions with the court:
1. requesting that this motion be made returnable in Montreal;
2. requesting that Andrea Scott and Tina Kharg appear before the court to be cross-examined on their affidavits filed in support of this motion;
3. counsel objected to the affidavits tendered in evidence because they contained copies of letters between counsel;
4. that the file be transferred to Montreal.
[3]
The motion in this court should be made returnable at the most convenient place. Where, as with this motion, the only persons necessary to attend in court are one counsel for each party, the balance of convenience appears to be equal, it being no more time consuming or expensive to travel from Montreal to Toronto than it is to travel from Toronto to Montreal. The balance being equal, the plaintiff is well within its rights to make its motion returnable in Toronto. In any event, this motion being one that could have been brought on ex parte, the fact that notice was voluntarily given to the responding defendants' counsel as a courtesy, would not put the moving party in a position where he was obliged to convenience opposing counsel further.
[4]
With regard to the request that the two affiants be required to attend to be cross-examined, I note again that the motion could have been made ex parte with no notice to the defendants. In
Imperial Chemical Industries plc et al. v. Apotex Inc.
(1989), 26 F.T.R. 47; 24 C.P.R.(3d) 176 (T.D.), it was stated that:
"By according the defendants counsel an opportunity to present adverse arguments, to which there is no entitlement, the plaintiffs counsel did not thereby alter the nature of the proceeding."
[5]
In that case, cross-examination was refused and the hearing proceeded without adjournment. Counsel of course was not present to conduct any cross-examination at the hearing in Toronto and to grant cross-examination whether in court or outside, would have necessitated a delay in the hearing of the motion. As indicated in
Imperial Chemical Industries plc v. Apotex
, the respondent has no right to cross-examine on a motion of this type and the matter should proceed to be heard.
[6]
With regard to the inclusion of correspondence between counsel in the affidavit filed in support of the motion, I note that the correspondence was not marked "without prejudice". For the most part correspondence was not putting forward suggestions for settlement of the issue. There was however, one letter, a portion of which was patently for the purposes of settlement and I disregarded that letter. I note that in my view it was not necessary to consider any of the evidence in letters to determine that there was sufficient evidence of a prima facie case and that I was therefore required to issue a show cause order.
[7]
With regard to the request that the file be transferred from Toronto to Montreal, the parties must be aware that this court operates in all parts of Canada. The file in each matter is in Ottawa. Duplicate files are maintained in the local registries of the court as required. A party may file documents in any registry of the court. I have already indicated that the place at which a motion is to be made returnable will depend on the balance of convenience. Poverty of one party is not a factor to be taken into account when determining the venue of a motion.
[8]
With regard to the location of the hearing to show cause, while each side will have one counsel, presumably one in Toronto and one in Montreal in this case, the corporate defendant and the individual defendant will each have a person attending. As pointed out by respondent's counsel, one of the plaintiff's witnesses who took the pictures and gave evidence of purchase will presumably give evidence at the hearing and is to be presumed located in the Montreal area. Because the complained of acts apparently all took place in Montreal, any further witnesses are more likely to be in Montreal although there is no evidence as to that.
[9]
I therefore conclude that the balance of convenience for the show cause hearing will indicate Montreal as the preferred venue. plaintiff's counsel appeared to agree with this. The show cause hearing itself will therefore be ordered held in Montreal.
[10]
On the motion before me it was not possible to estimate the duration of the hearing. Very frequently the alleged contemnors, witnesses and counsel appear on a regular motions day and the hearing is further adjourned by order of the motions judge to a date when all can attend on a special hearing day when time will permit the matter to be disposed of before a gowned judge and counsel with witnesses prepared to give viva voce evidence. A degree of solemnity is observed in contempt hearings where jail sentences may result.
[11]
Because of the two-city aspect of this case and the additional waste involved by attendance from a distance in the face of possible adjournment, I am making provision in my order for a possible change of return date and providing that notification of counsel of an alternative date shall constitute adequate service of notice of such altered date on the alleged contemnors.
Order
[12]
It is ordered that Primesco Inc. by one of its officers and Goulame Amarsy personally, attend before the presiding judge in Montreal at 10:00 a.m. on January 30, 1995 at 30 McGill Street to show cause why they should not be condemned for the contempts with which they are charged and to hear proof of such acts as outlined in paragraph 1 above, and to urge any grounds of defence that they may have. A copy of this order shall be served on the alleged contemnors prior to January 19, 1995.
[13]
It is further ordered that counsel shall advise the registry of their estimates of duration of the contempt motion and should counsel and the Registry conclude that a different date would be more convenient for all concerned, any notice of such new date shall be deemed sufficiently served on the contemnors if it is served on their counsel by facsimile or registered mail or in person 12 days before the new date for hearing the contempt motion.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Jana A. Andersen/dlr
[End of document]