 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  CF 340)
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
Federal Court
Tremblay-Lamer, J.
March 21, 2012.
Counsel:
Peter Shams, for the applicant;
Daniel Baum, for the respondent.
Solicitors of Record:
Peter Shams, Montreal, Quebec, for the applicant;
Myles J. Kirvan, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Montreal, Quebec, for the respondent.
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary. This case was originally cited as [2012] F.T.R. TBEd. AP.014.
[1]
Tremblay-Lamer, J.
: This is an application for judicial review of the decision of the Immigration and Refugee Board (the Board) pursuant to subsection 72(1) of the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act,
SC 2001, c 27 (the Act) whereby the applicant's claim for refugee protection under sections 96 and 97 of the Act was denied.
FACTS
[2]
The applicant is a citizen of Afghanistan. He claims to have a well-founded fear of persecution under section 96 of the Act based on his religion and membership in a particular social and political group, in addition to a need of protection under subsection 97(1) of the Act due to a danger of torture and a risk to his life, and a risk of cruel and unusual treatment or punishment. Specifically, the applicant fears his father's three half brothers over a property dispute and fears the Taliban due to his past work for an American Non-Governmental Organization (NGO), the Afghan Development Association (the ADA), an organization targeted by the Taliban.
[3]
The applicant states that his troubles began in October 2008, when his father told his half brothers that they were to separate a piece of land they co-owned. However, the half brothers refused, attacking the applicant's father, resulting in his hospitalization. Consequently, the applicant's family left their home.
[4]
The applicant claims that his father's half brothers are on the hunt for him, having passed out the applicant's picture, targeting him due to his association with the ADA. On December 1, 2008, his father would have been approached by a stranger who stated that his son would be killed due to his involvement with the ADA. Thus, the applicant was forced into hiding, living with one of his father's friends.
[5]
On January 21, 2009, with the help of an agent, the applicant managed to leave Afghanistan and ultimately arrived in Canada on February 10, 2009, claiming refugee status. The applicant then later amended his Personal Information Form (PIF) to include an attack by the Taliban on his brother on November 14, 2010, his brother having been shot. The Board rendered its negative decision on July 19, 2011, concluding that the applicant was not a Convention refugee, nor person in need of protection under the Act.
DECISION UNDER REVIEW
[6]
The Board did not believe the applicant's story, finding he lacked credibility due to significant contradictions and omissions. Firstly, the Board found that the applicant's fear of the Taliban was not credible, this fear being based on his step-uncles' ties with the group.
[7]
The applicant did not give consistent answers with regards to his step-uncles' ties with the Taliban. In the applicant's revised PIF of March 6, 2009 and February 22, 2011, the applicant stated that his step-uncles were members of the Taliban. However, in his original PIF and testimony, the applicant had stated that they were merely connected to the Taliban, not knowing for certain whether they were actually members. Thereby, the Board draws a negative inference from this inconsistency, rejecting the applicant's explanation that to him membership and connection are synonymous. In the Board's opinion, the applicant cannot now claim the terms are synonymous, having previously given them distinct meaning in his testimony. Therefore, the applicant did not provide a satisfactory explanation as to why he contradicted himself as to his step-uncles' involvement with the Taliban, diminishing his credibility as to his fear of persecution and his family's alleged association with the Taliban.
[8]
Moreover, the Board also found that the applicant contradicted himself with regards to his explanation of how he knew his step-uncles were tied to the Taliban. Initially, the applicant had testified that he knew his step-uncles were members of the Taliban because of the way they were dressed when they visited his father. Afterwards, in a separate testimony, he stated that it was because they were armed. When questioned as to why he did not initially state they were armed, the applicant responded that they were only armed occasionally. The Board rejected this explanation, concluding that such a distinguishing feature as a weapon would have been mentioned at the outset.
[9]
Similarly, when the applicant was asked how he knew the individual who made a threat to his father was from the Taliban, the applicant asserted that the individual identified himself as such. However, subsequently, the applicant stated that his father assumed the man making the threat was a member of the Taliban. In addition, it was not mentioned in the applicant's PIF that the man who made the threat was a member of the Taliban. Given this omission, these contradictory statements, and the lack of a valid explanation, the Board found the applicant's credibility with regards to his alleged fear to be further diminished. Thus, the Board did not believe the applicant's step-uncles were connected to the Taliban, nor that the applicant was wanted by the Taliban due to the above-mentioned property dispute or his employment with the ADA. Nonetheless, the Board went on to consider whether the applicant qualified for refugee protection due to an imputed political opinion by reason of his past employment with the ADA.
[10]
Referring to specific documentary evidence and acknowledging the targeting of NGO employees by the Taliban in Afghanistan, the Board noted that the applicant no longer worked for the ADA and that the latter had not demonstrated that as a past janitor and computer technician for the NGO, he would still be linked to the organization two and a half years later. Consequently, the Board concluded that the applicant would no longer be associated with the ADA should he return to Afghanistan.
[11]
The applicant takes issue with the Board's findings as to his credibility and the risk he faces in Afghanistan for having previously worked for an NGO.
STANDARD OF REVIEW
[12]
The Board's conclusions on credibility and insufficient evidence of risk of persecution are reviewed based on a standard of reasonableness (
Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration
)
v Khosa
, 2009 SCC 12, [2009] 1 SCR 339 at para 46 [
Khosa
];
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2010] FCJ No 54 at para 17 [
Dong
];
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2010] FCJ No 500 at para 10;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). Thus, deference is owed (
Khosa
, above at para 59,
Dong
, above at para 17,
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  87 ACWS (3d) 532). Thereby this Court cannot substitute its own views for that of the Board's, but rather, this Court must determine whether the Board's findings and decision fall within the "range of possible, acceptable outcomes which are defensible in respect of the facts and the law" (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2008] SCJ No 9 at para 47 [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ]).
ANALYSIS
[13]
The applicant argues that the Board erred in its assessment of the applicant's credibility. Firstly, the Board's reliance on the distinction between the notions of "membership" and "connections" was unreasonable, being purely based on semantics and a microscopic analysis. The evidence made it clear that notions dealing with membership in the Taliban are fluid and ambiguous. Consequently, the Board once again ignored the evidence before it. The Board also ignored the applicant's explanations: counsel for the applicant had asked that the latter amend his PIF and refer to his step-uncles as "members" without the assistance of an interpreter. In fact, both PIFs were filled out without the aid of a translator. Applicant's counsel at the time took the blame entirely for the inconsistent use of the terms "membership" and "connections", stating that she told the applicant to use the word membership. Furthermore, it was unreasonable for the Board to conclude that being armed was a distinguishing feature of the Taliban. It was also unreasonable for the Board to conclude that the applicant's testimony was inconsistent as to the identification of the man with his photo being a member of the Taliban. There was no discrepancy: the applicant's father thought he was a member of the Taliban and he identified himself as such. Rather, the Board ignored the social context in Afghanistan with regard to the Taliban and conducted a microscopic analysis.
[14]
The Respondent argues that the Board identified inconsistencies in the applicant's testimony with regards to membership and connections with the Taliban, put its concerns to the applicant, and explained why it rejected the applicant's explanation for these discrepancies. The applicant's step-uncles' link to the Taliban was central to proving his alleged risk, this burden being on the applicant. However, the applicant's answers to fundamental questions going to the heart of his supposed fear were inconsistent, as explained by the Board in its decision: the applicant contradicted himself as to the family's link to the Taliban (membership/connection); and his PIF did not state that the man who showed his picture to his father was a member of the Taliban. Thus, it was reasonable for the Board to rely on these omissions in the applicant's PIF to support its credibility finding, all important facts having to be included in it (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[15]
Having reviewed the transcription of the hearing and considered both parties' representations, I agree with the applicant: the Board erred in its assessment of the applicant's credibility.
[16]
At the beginning of the portion of its decision dealing with credibility, the Board stated that it relied on "significant contradictions and omissions" related to the applicant's step-uncles' ties to the Taliban, enumerating various supposed inconsistencies and contradictions (see para 10 of the Board's decision). However, a reading of the transcription reveals that the Board grounded its conclusion on insignificant inconsistencies or details, heavily focusing on the notions of membership and connections (
Dong,
above at paragraphs 27-28;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  99 NR 168). While the applicant does inconsistently use the terms, the notions themselves are ambiguous, as stated in the documentary evidence. We are not talking about elected political parties with membership cards, but rather a relatively loose organizational structure responsible for the killings of civilians. Thus, nothing clearly delineates nor enables someone to know whether an individual is a member of the Taliban or is merely connected to the organization. The notions are fluid.
[17]
The applicant explained why he stated at times his step-uncles were connected as opposed to members. At the beginning of the hearing, the applicant stated that his PIF and subsequent amendments were never translated to him and repeated that a proper translator/interpreter was not present when the question was explicitly put to him by the Board. Counsel for the applicant then put the question to the Board, asking it to explain the difference between membership and connection, in order for the applicant to understand its questions. However, the Board did not explain the distinction, but rather incessantly asked the applicant to explain why at one point he stated his step-uncles were members and then merely connected, even though the applicant had already stated it was because of a translation issue (see the transcription of the hearing at p 449 of the Tribunal Record). The applicant even stated that he did not understand the difference between connection and membership.
[18]
The Board also found the applicant's testimony inconsistent as to what enabled him to identify his step-uncles as members of the Taliban, stating at one point it was the way they were dressed, but then stating it was because they were armed. However, a reading of the transcription reveals that the applicant's answers were not inconsistent. The applicant stated that it was because of the way they dressed and acted that he knew his step-uncles were associated with the Taliban. When asked by the Board to clarify, he added that:
[t]he way the Taliban behave and the way they (inaudible) and asking many specific people, and then the Taliban asking people to do-asking our uncles to donate money in order to support. My uncles was supporting (inaudible), and the people coming was heavily armed, staying in the house (inaudible). (see transcription of the hearing at p 451 of the Tribunal Record).
[19]
As illustrated by the above-quoted passage, the applicant never contradicted himself, nor did he state that being armed was a distinguishing feature of the Taliban, contrary to the Board's findings.
[20]
The Board's decision does not accurately take into account the applicant's explanations, warranting this Court's intervention. While great deference is owed, due to the Board's reliance on insignificant details and its failure to properly consider the applicant's explanations, its conclusion as to the applicant's credibility is unreasonable. These errors are sufficient for me to allow the present application for judicial review and it is not necessary for me to determine whether the Board erred in its assessment of the applicant's risk of persecution due to his past association with the ADA: the Board's decision is unreasonable.
[21]
For the reasons above, the present application for judicial review is allowed.
JUDGMENT
[22]
THIS COURT'S JUDGMENT is that
1. The application for judicial review is granted.
2. The matter is referred back for redetermination by a different Board in accordance with the reasons given in this Judgment.
3. No question of general importance is certified.
.........................
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Tremblay-Lamer
[Traduction]: Il s'agit d'une demande de contrôle judiciaire présentée conformément au paragraphe 72(1) de la
Loi sur l'immigration et la protection des réfugiés,
LC 2001, c 27 (la Loi) à l'égard de la décision par laquelle la Commission de l'immigration et de la protection des réfugiés (la Commission) a rejeté la demande d'asile du demandeur en vertu des articles 96 et 97.
LES FAITS
[2]
Le demandeur est un citoyen de l'Afghanistan. Il prétend craindre avec raison d'être persécuté, au sens de l'article 96 de la Loi, à cause de sa religion et de son appartenance à un groupe social et politique en particulier et être également une personne à protéger, au sens du paragraphe 97(1) de la Loi, parce qu'il est exposé au risque d'être soumis à la torture, à une menace à sa vie et au risque de traitements ou peines cruels et inusités. Plus particulièrement, le demandeur craint les trois demi-frères de son père, à cause d'une dispute ayant trait à une propriété, ainsi que les talibans, en raison de son travail antérieur pour une organisation non gouvernementale américaine (ONG), l'Association afghane pour le développement (AAD), organisation ciblée par les talibans.
[3]
Le demandeur déclare que ses problèmes ont commencé en octobre 2008, lorsque son père a dit à ses demi-frères qu'ils devaient séparer un lot de terre dont ils étaient copropriétaires. Cependant, les demi-frères ont refusé de le faire et ont agressé le père du demandeur, qui a dû être hospitalisé. Par conséquent, la famille du demandeur a quitté sa maison.
[4]
Le demandeur prétend que les demi-frères de son père le pourchassent, qu'ils ont distribué la photographie du demandeur et qu'ils l'ont pris pour cible en raison de son association avec l'AAD. Le 1er décembre 2008, un étranger aurait abordé son père et lui aurait dit que son fils serait tué à cause de cette association avec l'AAD. Le demandeur a pour cette raison été forcé de se cacher et de vivre chez un ami de son père.
[5]
Le 21 janvier 2009, avec l'aide d'un agent, le demandeur a trouvé le moyen de quitter l'Afghanistan et, finalement, d'arriver au Canada le 10 février 2009, où il a revendiqué le statut de réfugié. Le demandeur a par la suite modifié son formulaire de renseignements personnels (FRP) de manière à y inclure l'agression de son frère (quelqu'un a tiré sur lui) perpétrée le 14 novembre 2010 par les talibans. La Commission a rendu une décision défavorable le 19 juillet 2011, concluant que le demandeur n'était ni un réfugié au sens de la Convention, ni une personne à protéger en vertu de la Loi.
LA DÉCISION CONTRÔLÉE
[6]
La Commission n'a pas cru l'histoire du demandeur et a conclu qu'il n'était pas crédible en raison de contradictions et omissions importantes. Premièrement, la Commission a estimé que la crainte du demandeur envers les talibans n'était pas vraisemblable, cette crainte reposant sur les liens des demi-frères de son père (les oncles) avec le groupe.
[7]
Le demandeur n'a pas donné de réponses cohérentes aux questions sur les liens de ses oncles avec les talibans. Dans ses FRP révisés du 6 mars 2009 et du 22 février 2011, le demandeur a déclaré que ses oncles étaient des membres des talibans. Cependant, dans ses FRP et témoignage initiaux, le demandeur avait déclaré qu'ils étaient seulement liés aux talibans, ne sachant pas avec certitude s'ils étaient réellement des membres. Par conséquent, la Commission a tiré une inférence défavorable de cette incohérence, rejetant l'explication du demandeur selon laquelle le fait d'appartenir et celui d'avoir des liens étaient des synonymes pour lui. De l'avis de la Commission, le demandeur ne peut pas maintenant prétendre que les termes sont synonymes, puisqu'il leur a donné antérieurement des sens distincts dans son témoignage. Par conséquent, le demandeur n'a pas expliqué de manière satisfaisante pourquoi il s'était contredit quant aux liens de ses oncles avec les talibans, ce qui diminue la vraisemblance de ses prétentions concernant sa crainte d'être persécuté et la prétendue association de sa famille avec les talibans.
[8]
De plus, la Commission a également conclu que le demandeur s'était contredit dans ses réponses à la question de savoir comment il savait que ses oncles étaient liés aux talibans. Initialement, le demandeur avait déclaré qu'il savait que ses oncles appartenaient aux talibans à cause de la façon dont ils étaient habillés lorsqu'ils visitaient son père. Par la suite, dans un témoignage distinct, il a déclaré qu'il le savait à cause du fait qu'ils étaient armés. À la question de savoir pourquoi il n'avait pas d'abord déclaré qu'ils étaient armés, il a répondu qu'ils n'étaient armés qu'occasionnellement. La Commission a rejeté cette explication, concluant qu'une caractéristique distinctive comme une arme aurait été mentionnée dès le début.
[9]
De même, lorsqu'on lui a demandé comment il savait que l'individu ayant menacé son père était un taliban, le demandeur a répondu que l'individu s'était identifié comme tel. Cependant, par la suite, le demandeur a déclaré que son père supposait que l'homme qui l'avait menacé était un membre des talibans. De plus, le demandeur n'avait pas mentionné dans son FRP que l'homme qui avait proféré la menace était un membre des talibans. Étant donné cette omission, ces déclarations contradictoires et l'absence d'une explication valable, la Commission a conclu que la crédibilité du demandeur relativement à sa prétendue crainte était davantage mise à mal. Par conséquent, la Commission n'a pas cru que les oncles du demandeur étaient liés aux talibans ni que le demandeur était pourchassé par les talibans en raison de la dispute susmentionnée liée à une propriété ou de son emploi auprès de l'AAD. La Commission s'est néanmoins penchée sur la question de savoir si le demandeur pouvait être considéré comme une personne à protéger à cause des opinions politiques qui lui seraient imputées en raison de son emploi antérieur auprès de l'AAD.
[10]
Renvoyant à une preuve documentaire précise et reconnaissant que les employés des ONG sont ciblés par les talibans en Afghanistan, la Commission a noté que le demandeur ne travaillait plus pour l'AAD et qu'il n'avait pas démontré que, ayant été dans le passé un concierge et un technicien en informatique pour l'ONG, il serait considéré comme lié à l'organisation deux ans et demi plus tard. Par conséquent, la Commission a conclu que le demandeur ne serait plus associé à l'AAD s'il retournait en Afghanistan.
[11]
Le demandeur conteste les conclusions de la Commission sur sa crédibilité et sur le risque auquel il est exposé en Afghanistan en raison de son travail antérieur pour une ONG.
LA NORME DE CONTRÔLE
[12]
Les conclusions de la Commission sur la crédibilité et sur l'insuffisance de la preuve ayant trait au risque de persécution sont susceptibles de révision selon la norme de conclusion raisonnable (
Canada (Ministre de la Citoyenneté et de l'Immigration
)
c Khosa
, 2009 CSC 12, [2009] 1 RCS 339, au paragraphe 46 [
Khosa
];
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2010] ACF no 54, au paragraphe 17 [
Dong
];
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2010] ACF no 500, au paragraphe 10;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). Par conséquent, il convient de faire preuve de retenue (arrêt
Khosa
, précité, au paragraphe 59, décision
Dong
, précitée, au paragraphe 17,
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  87 ACWS (3d) 532). La Cour ne peut donc substituer son avis à celui de la Commission, mais elle doit plutôt déterminer si les conclusions et la décision de la Commission appartiennent « aux issues possibles acceptables pouvant se justifier au regard des faits et du droit » (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2008] ASC no 9, au paragraphe 47 [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ]).
ANALYSE
[13]
Le demandeur soutient que la Commission a commis une erreur dans son appréciation de sa crédibilité. Premièrement, il était déraisonnable de la part de la Commission de fonder sa décision sur la distinction entre « le fait de faire partie » et « le fait d'avoir des liens », cette distinction reposant simplement sur une question sémantique et sur une analyse microscopique. La preuve démontrait clairement que les notions ayant trait à l'appartenance aux talibans étaient fluides et ambigües. Par conséquent, la Commission n'a une fois de plus pas tenu compte de la preuve dont elle disposait. Elle n'a pas non plus tenu compte des explications du demandeur: la conseil du demandeur avait demandé qu'il modifie son FRP et indique que ses oncles étaient des « membres », sans l'assistance d'un interprète. En fait, les deux FRP ont été remplis sans l'aide d'un traducteur. La conseil du demandeur à l'époque a accepté entièrement le blâme pour l'utilisation incohérente des termes « appartenance » et « liens », déclarant qu'elle avait dit au demandeur d'utiliser le mot « appartenance ». De plus, il était déraisonnable de la part de la Commission de conclure que le fait d'être armé constituait une caractéristique distinctive des talibans. Il était également déraisonnable de sa part de conclure que le témoignage du demandeur était contradictoire quant à l'identification de l'homme qui avait sa photo comme étant un taliban. Il n'y a pas de contradiction: le père du demandeur croyait qu'il était un membre des talibans et il s'est identifié lui-même comme tel. Au contraire, la Commission n'a tenu aucun compte du contexte social en Afghanistan en ce qui a trait aux talibans et a procédé à une analyse microscopique.
[14]
Le défendeur soutient que la Commission a relevé des contradictions dans le témoignage du demandeur en ce qui avait trait à l'appartenance aux talibans et aux liens avec ceux-ci, qu'elle avait exposé ses préoccupations au demandeur et qu'elle avait expliqué pourquoi elle rejetait l'explication du demandeur quant à ces contradictions. Le lien des oncles du demandeur avec les talibans avait une importance centrale pour démontrer les risques allégués, ce fardeau incombant au demandeur. Or, les réponses du demandeur à des questions fondamentales portant directement sur sa prétendue crainte étaient contradictoires, comme la Commission l'a expliqué dans sa décision: le demandeur s'était contredit quant au lien de sa famille avec les talibans (appartenance/lien) et son FRP ne faisait pas mention du fait que l'homme qui avait montré sa photographie à son père était un membre des talibans. Par conséquent, il était raisonnable de la part de la Commission de s'appuyer sur ces omissions dans le FRP du demandeur pour étayer sa conclusion sur la crédibilité, tous les faits importants ayant été pris en compte pour parvenir à cette conclusion (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[15]
Après examen de la transcription de l'audience et des observations des deux parties, je suis d'accord avec le demandeur: la Commission a commis une erreur dans son appréciation de la crédibilité du demandeur.
[16]
Au début de la partie de sa décision portant sur la crédibilité, la Commission a déclaré s'appuyer sur « les importantes contradictions et omissions » ayant trait aux liens des oncles du demandeur avec les talibans et a énuméré plusieurs prétendues incohérences et contradictions (voir le paragraphe 10 de la décision de la Commission). Cependant, la lecture de la transcription révèle que la Commission a fondé sa conclusion sur des incohérences ou des détails sans importance, en insistant beaucoup sur les notions d'appartenance et de liens (décision
Dong,
précitée, aux paragraphes 27 et 28;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  99 NR 168). Quoique le demandeur ait utilisé les termes de manière incohérente, les notions elles-mêmes sont ambigües, comme il ressort de la preuve documentaire. On ne parle pas de partis politiques élus avec des cartes de membres, mais plutôt d'une structure organisationnelle sans grande cohésion responsable d'assassinats de civils. Par conséquent, rien ne permet de déterminer clairement ou de savoir si un individu est un membre des talibans ou simplement lié à l'organisation. Les notions sont fluides.
[17]
Le demandeur a expliqué pourquoi il avait, à certains moments, déclaré que ses oncles étaient liés aux talibans, plutôt que des membres des talibans. Au commencement de l'audience, le demandeur a affirmé que son FRP et les modifications qu'il y avait apportées par la suite ne lui avaient jamais été traduits et il a répété qu'un traducteur/interprète compétent n'était pas présent lorsque la Commission lui a posé explicitement la question. La conseil du demandeur a ensuite demandé à la Commission d'expliquer la différence entre appartenance et lien afin que le demandeur comprenne les questions de la Commission. Cependant, la Commission n'a pas expliqué la distinction, mais plutôt n'a pas arrêté de demander au demandeur d'expliquer pourquoi à un certain moment il avait déclaré que ses oncles étaient membres des talibans et non simplement liés à ceux-ci, même si le demandeur avait déjà déclaré que c'était en raison d'une question de traduction (voir la transcription de l'audience à la page 449 du dossier du tribunal). Le demandeur a même déclaré qu'il ne comprenait pas la différence entre appartenance et lien.
[18]
La Commission a également estimé que le témoignage du demandeur était incohérent quant à ce qui lui avait permis de déterminer que ses oncles étaient des membres des talibans, le demandeur ayant déclaré à un certain moment que c'était la façon dont ils étaient habillés, puis que c'était parce qu'ils étaient armés. Cependant, la lecture de la transcription révèle que les réponses du demandeur n'étaient pas contradictoires. Le demandeur a déclaré que c'était par la façon dont ils s'habillaient et agissaient qu'il savait que ses oncles étaient des talibans. Lorsque la Commission lui a demandé d'expliquer cela plus clairement, il a ajouté que:
[traduction]
[l]a façon dont les talibans se comportent et dont ils (inaudible) et demandent à plusieurs personnes précises, et alors les talibans demandent aux gens de faire - demandent à nos oncles de donner de l'argent comme soutien. Mes oncles soutenaient (inaudible) et les gens qui venaient étaient lourdement armés, restaient dans la maison (inaudible). (Voir la transcription de l'audience à la page 451 du dossier du tribunal).
[19]
Comme le montre le passage cité ci-dessus, le demandeur ne s'est jamais contredit et il n'a pas dit non plus que le fait d'être armé était un signe distinctif des talibans, contrairement aux conclusions de la Commission.
[20]
La décision de la Commission ne prend pas correctement en compte les explications du demandeur, ce qui justifie l'intervention de la Cour. Quoiqu'il convienne de faire preuve d'une grande retenue, la conclusion de la Commission quant à la crédibilité du demandeur est déraisonnable, étant donné qu'elle repose sur des détails insignifiants et que la Commission n'a pas apprécié de manière appropriée les explications du demandeur. Ces erreurs suffisent pour que j'accueille la présente demande de contrôle judiciaire et il n'est pas nécessaire que je décide si la Commission a commis une erreur dans son appréciation du risque de persécution auquel était exposé le demandeur en raison de son association antérieure avec l'AAD: la décision de la Commission est déraisonnable.
[21]
Pour les motifs exposés ci-dessus, la présente demande de contrôle judiciaire est accueillie.
JUGEMENT
[22]
LA COUR STATUE
:
1. La demande de contrôle judiciaire est accueillie.
2. L'affaire est renvoyée à un tribunal constitué différemment de la Commission pour qu'il rende une nouvelle décision conformément aux motifs exposés dans le présent jugement.
3. Aucune question de portée générale n'est certifiée.
[End of document]