[1]
Reed, J.
: The appellant appeals a decision of the Registrar of Trademarks, dated November 27, 1987, expunging the trademark EXISTENCE from the register (Registration TMA 203,945). That trademark was registered on December 13, 1984, for use in association with cosmetics, namely, face creams.
[2]
The Registrar's decision was taken pursuant to a s. 44 (now s. 45) Notice. This was issued on November 19, 1985 at the behest of the respondent Charme et Beauté Lise Watier Inc.
[3]
Sections 44(1) and 44(3) of the
Trade Marks Act
, R.S.C. 1970, c. T-10, provide:
"(1) The Registrar may at any time and, at the written request made after three years from the date of the registration of a trademark by any person who pays the prescribed fee ... give notice to the registered owner of the trademark requiring him to furnish within three months
an affidavit or a statutory
declaration
showing
, with respect to each of the wares or services specified in the registration,
whether the trademark was in use in Canada
and, if not, the date when it was last so in use and the reason for the absence of such use since that date.
. . . . .
"(3) Where, by reason of the evidence furnished to him or the failure to furnish such evidence, it appears to the Registrar that a trademark, either with respect to all of the wares or services specified in the registration or with respect to any of such wares or services, is
not in use in Canada and that the absence of use has not been due to special circumstances that excuse the absence of use, the registration of the trademark is liable to be expunged
or amended accordingly." (Emphasis added)
[4]
The Registrar found that the registered trademark owner had no proven use of the trademark in Canada during the period of time immediately preceding the issuance of the s. 44 Notice. The Registrar's decision was based on a number of factors: (1) Helena Rubinstein was the registered owner of the trademark yet the appellant Coscelebre Inc. claimed to be the owner and was putting forward the evidence of use; a change of ownership of the mark had not been registered; evidence demonstrating that Coscelebre was merely a name change, on the part of Helena Rubinstein, rather than a corporate amalgamation or restructuring was not convincing; (2) while use of the trademark in the normal course of trade had been established up until June of 1983, the product had not been marketed in a serious commercial manner since July 1984 although four jars of the face cream had been sold to Cosmair Canada Inc. in August of 1985; these were resold by Cosmair to Pharmacie Cloutier in October of 1985; this sale was of an isolated nature and for a token quantity of goods; that sale could not be said to meet the requirement of s. 44; (3) no special circumstances had been proven to justify the nonuse of the trademark.
[5]
I would note that while the respondent, Charme et Beauté Lise Watier Inc., initiated the issuance of the s. 44 Notice and pursued the request to have the appellant's trademark expunged from the register, before the Registrar, Charme et Beauté Lise Watier Inc. did not appear before me. It chose not to contest the appellant's appeal of the Registrar's decision.
Nature Of The Proceedings
[6]
Additional evidence to that which was placed before the Registrar was placed before me. I accept that the nature of these proceedings is similar to a trial de novo in that the appellant has the right to adduce evidence which was not presented to the Registrar. It is trite law that the duty of the court is not restricted to deciding whether the Registrar was right or wrong: see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 49 (F.C.T.D.), at pp. 51-52.
[7]
It has also been said, however, that the court should be circumspect about interfering with a Registrar's decision: see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 298 (F.C.T.D.). Mr. Justice Strayer in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 135 (F.C.T.D.) noted:
"... the appellant urged me to treat the matter as completely de novo without regard to the chairman's decisions. While I accept that these appeals involve determinations of fact which I am as entitled as a registrar to make, in my view the court should be reluctant to reverse the finding of the registrar or chairman
unless it is clearly satisfied that he came to the wrong conclusion on the facts or unless there is significant new evidence placed before the court that was not before the registrar
." (Emphasis added)
[8]
A useful summary of the pertinent jurisprudence is set out by Mr. Justice Teitelbaum in
88766  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 260, at pp. 267-269 (F.C.T.D.).
Use By Trademark Owner?
[9]
One of the reasons which contributed to the Registrar's decision was the fact that the appellant Coscelebre was not the registered owner of the trademark, nor a registered user, nor an assignee. The Registrar's decision reads as follows:
"As I understand the decision rendered by the Court of Appeal in
Harris
[
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  than one affidavit and while the affidavits may be sworn to by third parties, the evidence of use must be
furnished by the owner
of the mark; i.e.
the legal owner
of the mark as of the notice date,
meaning the registered owner, a recent assignee or a duly registered user
. It could very well be that in the instant case, the evidence was properly furnished by the owner; however, given a fair reading of paragraphs 1 and 2 of the Mishkin affidavit it would appear that both companies co-existed for several years (paragraph 1) and I am therefore at a loss to understand how one company could have adopted the other's name without a dissolution or an amalgamation and how they could now be 'one and the same corporation' (paragraph 2). As properly argued by counsel for the requesting party there exists a serious doubt as to the admissibility of this evidence.
. . . . .
"... While I would not question the bona fides of this one sale [that of the four jars of face cream in August of 1985], it nonetheless appears as an isolated sale for a token quantity of wares originating from an unestablished legal entity bearing a name which is inconsistent with the packaging and labelling ..."
[10]
The evidence of Mr. Mishkin (affidavit of February 20, 1986), as to the status of Coselebre which was before the Registrar, is as follows:
"1. I am the Vice-President and General Counsel of Coscelebre Inc. whose offices are at 415 Madison Avenue, in the City of New York, in the State of New York. I have knowledge of the matters hereinafter deposed because I have been the Vice-President of Coscelebre Inc. since about 1976-77 and the General Counsel to the corporation since about 1974.
"2. Until about 25 July 1984, the corporate name of Coscelebre Inc. was Helena Rubinstein Inc. On or about 25 July 1984, the corporate name was changed from Helena Rubinstein Inc. to Coscelebre Inc. Although a change was made to the name of the corporate entity, Coscelebre Inc. and Helena Rubinstein Inc. are, otherwise one and the same corporation.
"3. Canadian Trademark Registration No. 203,945 for the trademark EXISTENCE for use with cosmetics namely, face creams, issued on 13 December 1974. The registration is owned by Coscelebre Inc. ('my company').
"4. The trademark HELENA RUBINSTEIN is owned by Coscelebre Inc. and is registered in Canada under trademark Registration No. 217,388. The trademark HELENA RUBINSTEIN is a house mark employed by Coscelebre Inc."
Further evidence on this point was filed before me. Mr. Mishkin's affidavit of December 9, 1986 - verified by an affidavit of January 26, 1988 - attests:
"2. Under both American and Canadian law it is possible, and, in fact, quite common, for the name of a domestic corporation to be changed. The change has no effect on the legal existence of the company nor does it affect the ownership of its assets including intellectual property. Viewed in this light, I can amplify and repeat the statements made in my affidavit dated February 20, 1986: (1) I am Vice President and General Counsel for Coscelebre Inc.; (2) I have held the position of General Counsel since 1974 and was made a Vice President of the corporation in 1977; (3) Prior to July 25, 1984, the name of the corporation was Helena Rubinstein Inc. and on that date, it became Coscelebre Inc. ('my company')."
A further affidavit by Mr. Mishkin dated January 25, 1988 attests:
"3. Paragraph 2 of my affidavit marked as Exhibit 'A' hereto indicates the status of the appellant (hereinafter referred to as 'my company') herein. In order to provide further clarification of my company's status, it is noted that my company is the same company that was known as Helena Rubinstein Inc. On July 25, 1984, Helena Rubinstein Inc. simply changed its corporate name to Coscelebre Inc. by amending its Certificate of Incorporation filed with the Secretary of State of the State of New York. Therefore, Coscelebre Inc. is the same corporation as the corporation whose name was Helena Rubinstein Inc. Accordingly, although the records of the Trademarks Office name Helena Rubinstein Inc. as the owner of Reg. No. 203,945, Coscelebre Inc. is the name of the owner of this mark."
[11]
In the case
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.), the registrant failed to notify the Registrar of the incorporation of her company and of her change of address. In addition, the assignment of the trademark to the company was not executed until after the registrant had knowledge that a s. 44 Notice has issued against her. The registrant's company and not the registrant had been using the mark. It was held that this discrepancy fell into the category of technical objections which did not affect consideration of whether the mark was in use at the time a s. 44 Notice was issued. This reasoning was based on the fact that the fundamental objective of s. 44 (now s. 45) is merely to rid the registry of deadwood and not to get caught up in technicalities nor to determine proprietary rights in the mark. In
Re Wolfville Holland Bakery Ltd.
(1964), 42 C.P.R. 88, at page 91 (Ex. Ct.), Mr. Justice Thorson said:
"It is clear that the purpose of s. 44 of the
Act
is to provide a procedure for trimming the register of trademarks, so to speak, by getting rid of 'deadwood' in the sense of trademarks that are no longer in use ..."
In addition, the mere fact that a transfer of ownership is not registered has been held not to invalidate the mark.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.), the owner named on the register differed from that of the true owner at the time the s. 44 Notice was sent. It was held that evidence of use submitted by the true owner could satisfy s. 44.
[12]
In the light of this jurisprudence and Mr. Mishkin's evidence that Helena Rubinstein Inc. and Coscelebre Inc. are one and the same company (the change of name having occurred in July of 1984), I am not prepared to find that use has not been proven for the purposes of s. 44 merely because the evidence of use in 1985 was use by Coscelebre.
Use In Canada?
[13]
The second argument I will consider, is that of the extent of the use. Most of the evidence, in this regard, which was before me, was also before the Registrar. The appellant filed invoices showing regular sales to Simpsons, by Helena Rubinstein Inc., during the months February, March, April, May and June of 1983. Simpsons ordered quantities of the creams (expressed as comprising between four to ten pieces) each month. Mr. Mishkin gave evidence that in his experience, the face cream could remain on a retailer's shelf for a considerable period of time, ranging from ten months to a year. Thus, he asserts that jars of the cream would still have been available for sale to the public in June of 1984 as a result of having been sold to Simpsons in June of 1983. Why a retailer would wish to maintain overhead on a product for that period of time is not explained. In addition, Simpsons' practice of ordering small quantities each month would seem to indicate that it was not in the habit of keeping quantities of the product on hand for long periods of time. The Registrar, however, would appear to have accepted Mr. Mishkin's submissions in this regard. He addressed his decision to the period between July 1984 and November 18, 1985, the latter being the date when the s. 44 Notice was issued. In any event, usage prior to July 1984 is not the crucial issue since it is the proper characterization of the August - October 1985 sale to Cosmair and resale to Pharmacie Cloutier which is significant.
[14]
On August 8, 1985, the appellant Coscelebre Inc. sold four jars of Existence face cream to Cosmair Canada Inc. The product was manufactured by Coscelebre in France. Cosmair was invoiced for these in French francs. Cosmair, in turn, in October of 1985, sold the jars of cream to Pharmacie Cloutier. This latter sale was in Canadian dollars. The currency in which the invoices were expressed is not relevant except to establish that the price paid by the retailer was commensurate with what would be expected in the ordinary course of business. There is no evidence that this sale was deliberately manufactured or contrived to protect the registration of the trademark. The sale occurred several months before the s. 44 Notice issued in November 1985. The Registrar characterized the sale as a bona fide one.
[15]
There was evidence respecting use, placed before me which had not been placed before the Registrar: Mr. Mishkin states that Existence face creams had been advertised in Canada during the relevant period in the magazines
Votre Beauté, Elle, Marie Claire
and
Madame Figaro
. No copies of these advertisements were filed.
[16]
As noted above, it is trite law that the purpose of a s. 44 proceeding is to remove deadwood from the trademark register. This proceeding is not designed to resolve contentious issues between competing commercial interests. (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 49 at pp. 57-58 (F.C.T.D.) and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(2d) 136 (F.C.A.)) Originally there seemed to be some support in the jurisprudence for the proposition that in order to fulfil the requirements of s. 44, all a trademark owner was required to do was to file a declaration of use. This was subsequently clarified to make it clear that such a declaration must provide or show some evidence of use - a bare declaration is not deemed to be sufficient. (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(2d) 62, at pp. 65-68 (F.C.A.)) In addition, the use has to be of a normal commercial nature, one which can be said to have taken place "in the normal course of business". It has been held that a single sale may satisfy that requirement.
[17]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 237, at pp. 240-241, the Federal Court of Appeal wrote:
"... The appellant alleged that the sales covered by the invoices show minimal regional sales to wholesalers in British Columbia, Nova Scotia and New Brunswick, indicating a pattern of token sales effected solely for the purpose of protecting its trademark registration. The invoices were said to indicate sales of the very trivial amount of 43 cartons of Marlboro cigarettes in a month. It was emphasized that there is no evidence of advertising, of sales to consumers or even to retailers.
"As this court has frequently said, s. 44 is designed primarily to clear the register of deadwood, not to resolve issues in contention between competing commercial interests, which would be resolved in expungement proceedings under s. 57:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at p. 210; 63 N.R. 140 at p. 141.
"McNair, J., has recently held in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , that
evidence of a single sale in the normal course of trade, whether wholesale or retail, may suffice
." (Emphasis added)
[18]
Mr. Justice McNair's comments (see also
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.)) which are referred to in the above quotation at page 293 of his decision, state:
"It is well established that the purpose and scope of s. 44 is to provide a simple, summary and expeditious procedure for clearing the register of trademarks which are not bona fide claimed by their owners as active trademarks. The procedure has been aptly described as one for removing 'deadwood' from the register. The section does not contemplate a determination on the issue of abandonment but rather simply places on the registered owner of the trademark the onus of furnishing evidence of use in Canada or of special circumstances excusing nonuser. The registrar's decision is not one that finally determines substantive rights but only whether the trademark entry is liable to be expunged under s. 44 or not. If user is relied on then the evidence filed in response to the notice must 'show' the use or, at least, sufficiently relate the facts from which such use can be inferred.
Mere statutory tracking in the nature of a bare statement that the registrant was currently using the trademark in the normal course of trade in association with the wares is insufficient
to establish user unless coupled with facts that are descriptively corroborative of the same.
Evidence of a single sale, whether wholesale or retail, in the normal course of trade may well suffice so long as it follows the pattern of a genuine commercial transaction and is not seen as being deliberately manufactured or contrived to protect the registration of the trademark.
Evidence in response to a s. 44 notice should be forthcoming in quality, not quantity, and there is no need nor justification for evidentiary overkill: ..." (Emphasis added)
[19]
The Registrar's decision reads, in part, as follows:
"In my view, the present case must be distinguished from the
Philip Morris
case, supra, and similar cases, in several important aspects. The affidavit does not contain a clear assertion that this one sale was effected in the normal course of the registrant's trade, nor that the trademark was in continuous use in Canada in the recent past. While I would not question the bona fides of this one sale, it nonetheless appears as an isolated sale for a token quantity of wares originating from an unestablished legal entity bearing a name which is inconsistent with the packaging and labelling as evidenced by Exhibit 1. I am not satisfied that Coscelebre Inc., has properly established a normal course of trade in Canada at the material time, I can find no probative evidence that Coscelebre Inc., has marketed Existence face cream in Canada in a serious commercial manner during the period from July 1984 to November 1985."
[20]
With respect, I do not think that s. 44 (now s. 45) imposes on a registrant the obligation to prove continuous use in Canada. It is conceivable that a trademark owner may have ceased using the mark but have restarted before a s. 44 Notice (now s. 45) issued and thus be able to prove recent usage. Also, I am not convinced that the Registrar used the right test when he asked himself whether the product had been marketed in "a serious commercial manner". The showing of "use in Canada" required by s. 44 (now s. 45) can be satisfied by a usage which falls short of "marketing in a serious commercial manner", providing the use is by way of a normal commercial transaction or in the normal course of trade.
[21]
As I read the jurisprudence, the conclusion I draw therefrom is that the sale to Cosmair and resale to Pharmacie Cloutier meets the test required under s. 44 (now s. 45). There is no doubt that the sale was bona fide. It was not manufactured for the sake of protecting the registration of the mark. It took place before the s. 44 Notice issued. While only four jars of face cream were sold, they are expensive; this may explain the small size of the order. In addition, there is some evidence that the trademark was used in advertising the product as well as in the Cosmair/Pharmacie Cloutier sale.
[22]
I do not read the jurisprudence as requiring the court or the Registrar to find a certain level of commercial activity, in order to prove use. The single sale, in this case, was not put forward as an example of one of many sales, as appears to have been the case in the
Philip Morris
case. On the other hand, it is not a sale divorced from all context as was true in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . The business of the appellant is clearly described. Mr. Mishkin asserts that the sale was one made "in the normal course of business" and this assertion accords with the evidence in the file of the context in which the sale was made.
Special Circumstances Which
Excuse Nonuse?
[23]
The special circumstance alleged to excuse nonuse is the bankruptcy of the appellant's distributor, Eletex Distributors Limited. Mr. Mishkin's affidavit dated December 9, 1986 states as follows:
"3. Prior to 1980, products bearing the trademark EXISTENCE were manufactured and distributed by a corporation affiliated with my company and in which my company (that is, Coscelebre Inc.) had a significant stock ownership interest. Early in 1980, that company closed operations and an independent third party Eletex Distributors Limited ('Eletex'), in August 1980, was subsequently appointed exclusive manufacturer and distributor of my company's products in Canada. It was recorded as a registered user of my company's registration in November 1980.
"4. Under the pressure of adverse business results, Eletex was reorganized in November 1981 but its shareholders were forced to place it in bankruptcy in March of 1982. Despite the cessation of Eletex' activities, my company's products including those bearing the trademark EXISTENCE would have remained on the counters of retail establishments throughout Canada for at least the balance of the year because trade channels had inventory on hand to exhaust over a period of time."
In an affidavit, dated January 25, 1988, Mr. Mishkin added to the explanation which had been before the Registrar:
"7. Paragraphs 3 and 4 of my affidavit of February 20, 1986 refer to the severe problems which my company experienced with respect to the exclusive Canadian distributor and manufacturer of my company's Existence brand products, Eletex Distributors Limited. In addition, it is noted that subsequent to the bankruptcy of Eletex Distributors Limited in March of 1982, protracted discussions and negotiations were held in the hope that Eletex could be reorganized, and thus continue its role as the distributor of my company's Existence brand products. These discussions were successful as the successor to Eletex Distributors Limited was to continue as my company's exclusive Canadian distributor and manufacturer of the Existence brand products. Regretably [sic], this company also, itself, eventually entered bankruptcy. During this period, from March 1982 to this later date, none of my company's Existence brand products was actually manufactured or distributed in Canada by Eletex Distributors Limited or its successors. Unfortunately, the full details as to the length of this time period are only available in my company's archival records, which I am unable to obtain by the January 27, 1988 deadline herein and because Coscelebre Inc. has just recently moved its business premises."
[24]
It is noteworthy that this evidence does not establish the length of time during which the financial position of Eletex and its successors was problematic. It is clear that, in general, the appellant's normal course of trade was to sell the jars of face cream to distributors who then resold them to retailers. In such circumstances, the bankruptcy of a distributor would have a disruptive effect and constitute special circumstances justifying nonuse (The tests relating to special circumstances are set out in
88766  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 260 at p. 269 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at pp. 123-125 (F.C.T.D.) and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.)). In this case, Mr. Mishkin attests that the distributor was also the manufacturer of the face cream for Canada. The evidence does not establish, however, that there is any reason to suppose that the bankruptcy of the distributor/manufacturer had a necessarily disruptive effect during the whole period from March 1982 to November 1985. There is no reason to assume that the negotiations which took place after March 1982 and which are referred to in Mr. Mishkin's affidavit of January 1988, lasted for over two years rather than for merely a few months. The absence of this information in Mr. Mishkin's affidavit of January 25, 1988, or in any subsequent affidavit, leads me to conclude that the negotiations probably lasted for a shorter rather than a longer period of time. Also, while Eletex was the exclusive manufacturer for Canada, once that company went into bankruptcy, I am not convinced that product which had been manufactured outside of Canada could not have been provided by the appellant or its predecessor to the Canadian market. On the basis of the evidence filed, I could not conclude that the appellant has proven special circumstances justifying nonuse.
Conclusion
[25]
The appeal will be allowed and the registration maintained. In my view, the appellant has proved use as required for the purposes of s. 44 of the
Trade Marks Act
.
Appeal allowed.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/sms
[End of document]