[1]
MacKay, J.
: The applicants, all members of a family, are producers of seed potatoes in Prince Edward Island. They seek relief by certiorari from decisions of officers of Agriculture Canada that their entire 1988 production of potatoes grown for seed should not be certified for sale as seed. The decisions were made because their crops were considered contaminated by bacterial ring rot. As a result their seed potato production from some 600 acres (more than 225 hectares) of land located in 32 different locations scattered across some miles in the western portion of the Island, was, under provincial legislation, subject to quarantine, to be destroyed or disposed of subject to approval of provincial officials.
[2]
The province of Prince Edward Island, with its undulating fields of good soil, has long been known as a centre of production of seed potatoes of fine quality which are shipped to many parts of Canada and abroad for tablestock or for seed. Quality is ensured by a thorough system of inspection and grading carried out by officers of the Inspection Branch of Agriculture Canada, a system which serves the agricultural industry as a whole and the multitude of farmers who grow potatoes for seed, or for other markets. When seed crops are inspected and they do not meet quality standards they are not certified for sale as seed potatoes and provincial legislation regulates the manner of their quarantine if contaminated, their destruction if necessary, and their shipment for sale as table stock, for processing, for feed or any other disposal.
[3]
The issue raised by this application under s. 18 of the Federal Court Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7, is whether the decisions in question were made in accord with the applicable statute and regulations (Seeds Act, then R.S.C. 1970, c. S-7 as amended, now R.S.C. 1985, c. S-8, and Seeds Regulations, C.R.C. 1978, c. 1400 as amended, made under s. 4 of the Act) and in accord with principles of administrative law by which those are to be applied, and whether they were made in accord with principles of fairness now recognized as applicable even in the case of many administrative decisions. The applicants submit that the decision is defective on both grounds and that it should be quashed by certiorari.
[4]
In the notice of motion initiating the application other relief was requested but at the hearing of the matter this was not pursued. Thus reference to relief by way of declaratory order, defining the word "contamination" as used in s. 52(2)(d) of the Seeds Act Regulations was abandoned, and it could not have been considered in these proceedings by way of application with an originating motion: rule 603 of the Federal Court Rules. Relief sought by way of mandamus, if certiorari be granted, to compel discharge of their responsibilities by officers of Agriculture Canada was not pursued at least in part because of an undertaking by counsel for the respondent that the officers responsible would discharge their duties if the court should decide that the original decision be quashed.
[5]
At the hearing of this matter counsel for the applicants stressed that relief is sought at this stage not for any loss they may anticipate through disposal of their 1988 crop other than on the seed potato market and not for the decision to be reversed. Rather, they are concerned to have an opportunity to be heard and to provide information about their methods of production in 1988 before a considered decision is made about certification or lack of certification for their entire production of seed potatoes. Lack of certification has serious implications not only for final disposal of their 1988 crops but also for their 1989 production. Under the Seeds Regulations, supra, s. 50(3)(a)(ii), inspection for certification of seed potatoes is not to be made of a growing crop if the crop is growing on a farm where in the previous two years potatoes infected with bacterial ring rot were produced or found. Under provincial legislation fields deemed contaminated by presence of the disease in potatoes may not be used for potato production apparently for at least three years.
The Facts
[6]
The applicants carry on a family farming operation, producing potatoes, with parts of the operation in the names of one or more family members. As noted, their production is carried on in a number of fields, scattered in western Prince Edward Island, some separated by considerable distance. They also are involved in sales of potatoes for tablestock or seed, including potatoes purchased from other growers for sale on the market.
[7]
They have had unfortunate experience in the production of potatoes for sale as seed both in 1986 and in 1988. Prior to 1986 they had not experienced any problem with bacterial ring rot with any of their crops. In October of that year after all necessary field inspections a sample of 400 tubers from stock of the variety Kennebec grown on Griffin lands was routinely tested and laboratory tests were positive for the disease. In accord with normal departmental practice further sampling was done and samples tested, including a sample of one thousand tubers of the variety Superior and laboratory tests were negative. Despite the latter test results a Bacterial Ring Rot Specimen Report was completed October 22, 1986 and all seed potato crops produced in that year on the entire Griffin family operation were rejected, pursuant to the same legislation and policies as were to be applied again in 1988.
[8]
Following the positive test in 1986 the Prince Edward Island Potato Marketing Board Plant Disease Eradication office advised the Griffins that their farm, machinery, equipment and all potato stock were under quarantine, subject to destruction or disposal in the case of potato stock under the direction of the Board, and subject to disinfection measures to the satisfaction of the Board.
[9]
Disinfection of the Griffins' farm, machinery and equipment was undertaken after 1986 and the final record of disinfection was completed in May 1987 by inspectors. I infer that in 1987 the particular field in which the contaminated Kennebec stock was grown the previous year was not used for production of potatoes for, as the provincial Board had advised in 1986, all positive bacterial ring rot fields are considered danger zones and are out of potato production for three crop years under provincial legislation. Another field in which the Superior variety had been grown in 1986 was not used for potato production in 1987 but rather was planted with a rotational nonpotato crop. In 1987 the Griffins applied for crop inspection for potatoes grown for seed from fields other than that contaminated with bacterial ring rot the previous year and satisfactory reports of field inspection were issued for all crops meeting standards required under the regulations.
[10]
In 1988 the Griffins again planted seed potatoes and applied for inspection of their growing crops. Inspections were undertaken. In one field entered under the name of Mary Ellen Griffin, a field planted with the Shepody variety, a number of volunteer plants of the Superior variety were found. Volunteer plants are those which seed themselves from tubers left in the ground from previous years, or otherwise take root, without having been planted by the grower. In this case it is assumed the volunteers took root from potatoes left from the 1986 crop year or earlier since the field had not been planted with potatoes in 1987. The Griffins were advised that volunteers would have to be removed in order for the crop to meet certification standards.
[11]
Towards the end of July 1988 a sample of 45 tubers was taken from the volunteer Superior plants and was submitted to the laboratory in Charlottetown for testing. The Seed Potato Testing Laboratory Inventory Record indicates that the sample was collected on July 27 and was submitted to the laboratory on August 9. The result of the tests completed on August 12, 1988, was positive for bacterial ring rot. On August 15, 1988, inspectors orally informed one applicant, Peter Griffin, of the positive laboratory test.
[12]
Three days later on August 18, 1988, a Bacterial Ring Rot Specimen Report was prepared by inspector R.W. Coughlin in the name of Mary Ellen Griffin, the grower of the Shepody variety in whose field the volunteer Superior plants were found and from which was taken the sample found to be contaminated. That Report refers to specimen number "91-88" from the variety "Superior" from "(1986 Crop) Volunteer", with details of the crop planted in the field from which the specimen was taken, including the certificate number of seed planted from the Shepody variety from the grower's own stock. Also included on the form report is an affirmative check "that disease found on farm previously" in 1986, and that the "suspected source of infection" was "1986 'contact' Superiors". On the Specimen Report, above the inspector's signature, is this notation:
"Mary Ellen Griffin is one part of W.P. Griffin Inc., also included is Peter Griffin and John Griffin. This is all one operation and all parties would be considered 'contact'."
The Specimen Report also lists the five crops grown in the name of Peter and John Griffin together by variety under the heading "Other potato fields grown and rejected on same farm due to the presence of ring rot in current year." On the reverse side of the form there is listed for each family member the varieties, acreage, grades and registered seed numbers from which stock was planted. The form was completed on August 30, 1988, by the biologist in charge of the seed potato certification laboratory in Charlottetown, confirming that sample 91-88 was confirmed positive for Cornebacterium Sepedonicum, i.e., bacterial ring rot, by laboratory tests.
[13]
Also on August 18th, Inspector R.W. Coughlin who had taken the sample of volunteer Superior stock for testing, completed Rejection Notices and accompanying Reports of Field Inspection for all of the Griffin family's seed potato operations. In all, some seven Rejection Notices were completed, all dated August 18, 1988, one addressed to W.P. Griffin relating to four different crops with separate Reports of their field inspections, two in the name of Mary Ellen Griffin relating to four different crops, two in the name of Peter Griffin each relating to a different crop, one in the name of John Griffin relating to two different crops and one in the joint names of John and Peter Griffin relating to five different crops. The seventeen Reports of Field Inspection accompanying the Notices of Rejection related in each case to a particular variety and grade of seed potatoes grown in one or more locations. Thus, one Report of Field Inspection in the name of Mary Ellen Griffin related to the Shepody variety, Foundation Class, consisting of 12 hectares planted in three different fields, one of which fields contained volunteer Superior plants from which was taken the sample that proved positive for bacterial ring rot. That Report included the notations "Rejected" and "Ring Rot Found in Volunteer Superior" and the Rejection Notice for this crop included the notation "Rejected for Ring Rot found in volunteer Superior in Your Shepody field Puisville Road (4.8)". The other Rejection Notice in the name of Mary Ellen Griffin and the related Reports of Field Inspection included notations that rejection was because of "Contact Ring Rot". All of the other Rejection Notices and Reports of Field Inspection issued to the other members of the Griffin family included notations that rejection was for "Contact Ring Rot from Mary E. Griffin".
[14]
On August 30, 1988, the National Seed Potato Bureau of Agriculture Canada in Ottawa was advised of action taken in the Griffin case. By similar registered letters dated September 1, 1988, each of the plaintiffs was advised by the P.E.I. Potato Marketing Commission, Plant Disease Eradication office of advice received from Agriculture Canada that:
"a sample of Superior volunteers collected from one of your potato fields (2.8ha. Shepody) was confirmed positive for Cornebacterium Sepedonicum (Bacterial Ring Rot) by laboratory tests at the Charlottetown Seed Potato Certification Lab. Consequently your 1988 potato crop, farm premises and equipment are considered contaminated. Your crop is to be moved
only
under the supervision of an Inspector."
The letters further advised about arrangements for disposal of the potato crop under supervision of the Board and about disinfection steps to be undertaken under the supervision and to the satisfaction of an inspector prior to bringing any seed potatoes for the 1989 crop onto the farm.
[15]
In September 1988 a confirmation test on the original sample from Superior volunteer plants was conducted at the Fredericton, New Brunswick Seed Potato Certification Laboratory and that test was also positive for bacterial ring rot. The plaintiffs believe that other samples from their 1988 crop were taken, including from the Shepody variety grown in the field from which the sample of volunteer Superior stock was taken, but no positive results other than on the original sample have been reported to them.
[16]
Following receipt of the letters from the Board the Griffins consulted solicitors who then met with representatives of Agriculture Canada on September 9, 1988, including the Program Officer of the Plant Health and Seed Potato Certification Program in Prince Edward Island. None of the applicants were present. The solicitors were advised by the Program Officer that the decision to turn down all potatoes connected with the Griffin family operation was based on an unwritten policy of Agriculture Canada which required that if positive ring rot were found in any portion of a seed potato farming operation the total crop grown is to be rejected. They also learned that while this policy had not been strictly enforced in the past and that there were some instances where individuals had been differently treated, the practice now in effect was that the policy was strictly enforced.
[17]
It appears from the affidavit of the Program Officer relied upon by the respondent in this application, the same officer as was present at the meeting on September 9, 1988, but who makes no reference to that meeting in his affidavit, that the policy of Agriculture Canada in relation to bacterial ring rot is one of longstanding and is included in a Seed Potato Certification Circular No. 9 from the Plant Protection Division of Canada Department of Agriculture, dated September 4, 1959. It does appear that no reference to this written statement of policy was made at the meeting in September with solicitors for the applicants.
[18]
This policy statement is acknowledged as the basis for decisions in relation to each of the Rejection Notices completed for all of the growing crops of the applicants' seed potatoes. It is of passing interest that the applicants were not aware of Circular No. 9 until after the commencement of this application. Further, when counsel for the applicants met in September, before this application was initiated, with the Program Officer, whose affidavit is relied upon by the respondent, and with an inspector and another representative of Agriculture Canada, the departmental representatives did not refer to this written policy directive but rather they referred to "unwritten" policy of the department. It is surely not good administration when policy is relied upon but not known in printed form and not readily available to the administrators concerned or to those who may be affected by their decisions based upon the policy.
[19]
Bacterial ring rot is a serious problem for all concerned with quality potato production. It is described in the affidavit provided on behalf of the respondent which refers to the disease as "B.R.R." in the following terms:
"B.R.R. is one of the most contagious and most feared diseases of potatoes, particularly among seed potato growers. B.R.R. is caused by a microscopic bacterium called
Corne-bacterium Sepedonicum
. The bacterium is not transmitted by air and is not known to be transmitted by soil alone. It can, however, survive for a year or more under favourable conditions on farming equipment and in storage facilities. The bacterium overwinters particularly well in infected host tubers and potato plant material left in a field after harvest. It multiplies in host material and in subsequent volunteer potato growth until weather conditions are such that winter frost leads to decay of the host material and its elimination from the soil. It is for the above reason that land (field or fields) in which is found a positively infected potato must be quarantined from further seed potato production for a minimum of two years or until such land is verified free from volunteer potato growth. The bacterium is easily transmitted by way of farm machinery, clothing of farmworkers, potato storage material, i.e., bags or containers or warehouses."
The serious nature of the disease is discussed by my learned brother, Pinard, J., in an earlier case dealing with the Seed Regulations, Part II, on the basis of expert evidence presented to him: see  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at pp. 77-78.
[20]
In this case, after the sample of volunteer Superiors from one of the Griffins' fields tested positive for bacterial ring rot, the entire production of potatoes grown for seed by all members of the Griffin family was rejected for certification. In support of that rejection the Program Officer, Mr. McSwain, whose affidavit is relied upon by the respondent avers that:
"I was aware that the farming machinery, i.e., tractors, cultivation equipment, spraying equipment was commonly used in the various locations where potatoes were being grown on the Griffins' family operation. Even though planting dates may vary for different locations the spraying and cultivation activities are ongoing throughout the growing season, thus the bacterium could be transmitted."
This knowledge of the Program Officer is not attributed to nor said to be derived from the inspector who made the decision to reject all of the Griffins' crops. Perhaps one is expected to infer similar awareness on the part of the inspector, or that his decision was made after consultation with the Program Officer whose evidence is relied upon by the respondent. Nevertheless, the record is clear that this knowledge was not derived directly from the Griffins for no inquiry was made of them. We know that the inspector was aware of the positive test and by inference from his entries on the Notices of Rejection that he knew of the general policy of the department even if he might not have been familiar with the terms of Seed Potato Certification Circular No. 9.
The Regulatory And Policy Regime For Seed Potatoes
[21]
Grading and quality standards, inspection, certification and labelling requirements for seed potatoes are established by the Seeds Regulations, Part II, supra, made pursuant to s. 4 of the Seeds Act, supra. These legislated requirements are intended to ensure that sale, import and export of any seed, including seed potatoes, is undertaken only if the seed meets established requirements; otherwise the sale, import or export of seed is prohibited under the Act.
[22]
Section 4(1) of the Seeds Act provides extensive authority for the Governor-in-Council to make regulations, including "(c) prescribing the minimum standards of purity, germination, quality and disease for seeds". Under the Seeds Regulations, Part II, five grades of seed potatoes are established, namely "Elite I", "Elite II", "Elite III", "Foundation" and "Certified". All plantings for production of seed potato are visually inspected at the growing stage, upon application by the grower, to ensure prescribed standards are met. The number of field inspections by Agriculture Canada inspectors varies according to the grade, either three or two times during a growing season. All grades of seed potatoes must be free of bacterial ring rot. If the presence of the disease is noted in any field inspection the inspector is precluded from issuing a certificate. If the prescribed standards are met throughout the inspection process the inspector completes appropriately a Report of Field Inspection and a certificate certifying the grade and variety of potatoes. Tubers are further subject to inspection when harvested and also when in storage before delivery to a buyer. Under Schedule VI, s. 2 of the Seeds Regulations, Part II, "No tuber in any lot of seed potatoes shall show symptoms of bacterial ring rot." If tubers are packaged or stored in accord with Regulations and continue to meet standards an inspector provides to the producer, prior to shipment or delivery to a buyer, official labels or tags, or a written permit, depending on whether seed potatoes are packaged for sale or sold in bulk. These tags or permits, with registration numbers, are essential for subsequent inspection of production of potatoes for seed and they identify the source of the seed used by a grower.
[23]
Provisions of the Seeds Regulations, Part II, of interest in this application for certiorari include the following sections:
"49(1) Every application for inspection of a growing crop shall be made on a form supplied by the Department ...
"50(1) Subject to subs. (3), inspection of a growing crop shall only be made under the following conditions:
(a) the crop is planted with seed potatoes that
(i) are of a prescribed variety and
(A) satisfy the requirements for grade Elite I, Elite II, Elite III or Foundation, or
(B) were imported from a state of the United States and were certified ...
(ii) were produced from a growing crop that had been inspected by an inspector and approved by the officer in charge as a growing crop that would produce seed potatoes of a grade referred to in clause (i)(A); and
(b) the person applying for inspection is able, at the time of inspection, to establish to the satisfaction of an inspector the origin and grade of each lot of seed potatoes planted.
. . . . .
"50(3) Inspection shall not be made of a growing crop if
(a) the crop is growing on a farm where, in the previous two years,
. . . . .
(ii) potatoes infected with bacterial ring rot were produced or found;
(a.1) the crop is growing in a field where there has been an occurrence of bacterial ring rot, until the field has been kept free from planting of potatoes of any kind for two full years after the occurrence;
. . . . .
(g) an inspector has reason to believe that the equipment used to plant or cultivate the crop is contaminated by pathogens that are or may be detrimental to the crop.
"51(1) Where an application is made pursuant to s. 49 for inspection of a growing crop, an inspector shall inspect that crop as required by Schedule IV for the grade of potatoes that the crop is intended to produce in order to determine whether the crop meets the growing crop requirements for that grade.
. . . . .
"52(1) Subject to subs. (2), where an inspector has inspected a growing crop and is satisfied that the crop meets all the requirements set out in Schedule IV for a grade of seed potatoes, he shall issue to the grower a certificate
(a) specifying
(i) the grade and variety of the potatoes,
(ii) the number of hectares planted, and
(iii) the certificate numbers; and
(b) stating that the crop meets the requirements for the grade.
"52(2) A certificate shall not be issued in respect of a growing crop where
. . . . .
(c) any community or custom equipment was used in cutting the seed, or in planting, cultivating or harvesting the growing crop without being disinfected to the satisfaction of an inspector;
(d) in the opinion of an inspector, the crop has been contaminated with bacterial ring rot; or
(e) evidence has been obtained that bacterial ring rot was found in another crop that was derived from the same parent crop, unless microscopic examination, or other laboratory method approved by the Minister, of the tubers of that growing crop establishes freedom from bacterial ring rot ..."
[24]
Schedule IV of the Seeds Regulations, Part II, describes the grades established for seed potatoes, (i.e., "Elite I" and the other four grades) and it establishes that on each field inspection there is to be "nil percentage", referred to in argument as "nil tolerance", for bacterial ring rot.
[25]
In addition to the Act and Regulations, Agriculture Canada relies upon a published policy statement or directive, dated September 4, 1959, which discusses Bacterial Ring Rot Policy. That statement, described as Seed Potato Certification Circular No. 9 was issued by Canada Department of Agriculture, Production and Marketing Branch, Plant Protection Division and signed by the then Director of the Division. This statement refers to a review of policy followed by district officers in connection with rejection of crops for bacterial ring rot and proposes guidelines as follows:
"... some inspectors feel that if bacterial ring rot is found in a lot of seed being grown in another province, the fields planted locally with the same seed should be rejected whether bacterial ring rot is present or not. This policy is probably desirable but insupportable in general practice. We have no control over the handling of the seed or where it might have been stored after it left the grower's premises and possible contamination during one or more handlings. Then again, it has been noted that many growers do not use the latest recommended disinfectants on their machinery and thus new seed could become infected. Furthermore, we have reason to believe that, in some cases at least, the machine being disinfected has not been thoroughly cleaned before disinfection. Such a policy might work great hardship on some growers.
"Arising from the above-mentioned study, the following procedure is proposed:
1. All crops in which bacterial ring rot is found are to be rejected and, in addition all crops produced with the use of the same machinery, whether on the same farm or not, must be rejected, as well as all potato crops on the same farm.
2. When a crop being produced locally (within the same inspection district, or in the whole province in P.E.I.) from seed which has been found to be infected on the original grower's farm, all crops are to be rejected wherever planted whether ring rot is found or not. The only exception to this ruling would be where a crop is planted as a seed plot in multiple unit with no suspicion of possible contamination.
3. When bacterial ring rot is found in a crop in another province or in an area greatly removed from the original source, the crops produced from the same seed should be placed under suspicion and examined and re-examined many times in the field, in the bin and at grading time, and the inspector thoroughly convinced that no bacterial ring rot is present before tags can be issued. Incidentally, one of the best times to find this disease is to follow the digger at harvest time whenever possible.
"There are probably other conditions which may cause the inspector to reject crops for possible contamination by bacterial ring rot. Please bear in mind that tags must not be issued until the inspector is reasonably certain that no danger of infection exists, as far as he can determine."
[26]
Before the hearing of this matter the applicants were not advised of the particular guideline included in this policy statement upon which the inspector based his decisions, though counsel for the applicants were advised at their meeting on September 9 that policy required rejection of all crops in a farming operation when bacterial ring rot is found in tubers growing in that operation. Presumably the authority for this policy, even if it is here identified after the decision was made, is item 1 in the procedures proposed in Circular No. 9. Item 2 in the Circular is not applicable to this situation and item 3, even if applicable to a grower within Prince Edward Island, would not appear readily applicable to the applicants' circumstances.
[27]
Reference is made in the affidavit of the Program Officer on behalf of the respondent, to a further document of the Department, an Inspection Manual, Seed Potatoes which under s. 6.2.2 provides in part:
"When a farming operation has bacterial ring rot, steps must be taken to ensure the elimination of the disease. Use of disease-free seed accompanied by strict sanitation procedures is the only method of control.
1. Dispose of all potatoes on the farm when the disease is found either by selling on the tablestock market, processing, cattlefeed or burial."
While this is not directly relevant to the issues raised by the applicants, it does indicate further how seriously the disease is considered and at least some of the procedures sought by the department to control bacterial ring rot including steps to dispose of all potatoes "on the farm when the disease is found", by methods other than sale as seed potatoes.
Issues And Argument
[28]
Acting under the Seeds Regulations and in accord with departmental policy as he understood these, the inspector rejected all of the growing crops in production for seed potatoes by the Griffin family and that action is questioned by this application for certiorari.
[29]
The applicants submit that s. 52 of the Seeds Regulations vests discretion in an inspector, which requires him to inspect individual crops and under subs. (1) where he is satisfied that a crop meets the requirements set out in Schedule IV to issue a certificate, subject to s. (2)(d) that a certificate is not to be issued in respect of a growing crop where "in the opinion of an inspector the crop has been contaminated with bacterial ring rot". It is argued that the words "in the opinion of an inspector" in subs. 2(d) are consistent only with the construction that the inspector's authority is discretionary, even in that subsection as it is throughout s. 52 of the Regulations. The applicants submit that the discretion of an inspector is not properly exercised where in reliance upon departmental policy guidelines, without any further inquiry about the circumstances relevant to a particular growing crop, the inspector refuses certification of all crops however and wherever grown by producers who together engage in production.
[30]
The applicants further submit that principles of fairness applicable to the exercise of discretion in this case under s. 52 of the Seeds Regulations were not observed in the decision of the inspector for that decision was based upon policy guidelines of the department without any inquiry which would have permitted the applicants to provide information about planting, cultivating, spraying and disinfection procedures followed in relation to their various plantings of seed potatoes in 1988.
[31]
Response to the applicants' arguments as submitted in the respondent's motion record, and urged in argument, is as follows:
"It is clear from the record and the application of the principles contained in the policy directive, being the 1959 Bacterial Ring Rot Policy, Seed Potato Certification Circular No. 9 that once the disease had been found on the applicants' potato operation that there being a 'nil tolerance' for this disease set out in the legislation that the particular potato inspector had no discretion in the circumstances. Faced with the facts before him, and under a duty to apply the Seeds Act, supra, he had no choice but to reject the entire crop for certification under the legislation. Indeed under the legislation in issue here it is the duty of officers of Agriculture Canada to protect the public interest, and that of potato farmers in particular, from the threat of this particular disease spreading beyond the potato farm operation in question."
The respondent relies in argument in support of this submission upon the policy statements of the department contained in Seed Potato Certification Circular No. 9 and in s. 6.2.2 of the Inspection Manual, Seed Potatoes, and upon the Seeds Regulations, Part II, ss. 50(3)(g), 52(2)(d) and Schedules IV and VI.
[32]
The situation faced by the applicants is unusual in that the only evidence of bacterial ring rot comes from a sample from volunteer plants which was not planted by them in 1988 or even in 1987. This differs from the situation they faced in 1986 when the disease was found in a sample of tubers of a different variety grown by them for seed in that year. Application of the departmental policy guidelines by the decisions of the inspector imply that, regardless of the level of care taken by the applicants in 1988 in relation to the more than 225 hectares of seed potatoes planted by them, they could not have obtained certification of any portion of their various growing crops once volunteer plants were discovered to be contaminated.
[33]
It is worth note that the presence of bacterial ring rot in the sample of volunteer Superior stock is not contested and the applicants do not contest the denial of certification for potatoes planted for seed in the same field as the contaminated volunteers were found. The issue between the parties relates to the decisions of the inspector to refuse certification for all of the other seed potatoes grown in other fields by the applicants.
[34]
The authority of an inspector is defined by the Seeds Regulations made within the authority delegated to the Governor-in-Council under the Seeds Act. In relation to a growing crop of seed potatoes the Regulations provide for application to be made annually by a grower for field inspections (s. 49), for conditions essential before an inspection is undertaken (s. 50), for certification of variety and grade of potatoes where the inspector is satisfied that standards have been met (s. 52(1)) and where there is no basis to refuse certification on the grounds set out (s. 52(2)). Throughout these sections the authority of an inspector is consistently related to "a growing crop", which is not synonymous with "farm" or "field", terms which are distinguishable from "a growing crop" under ss. 50(3)(a)(ii) and 50(3)(a.1).
[35]
A "growing crop" is defined in s. 45 of the Regulations to mean "a growing crop of seed potatoes". Section 52 authorizes an inspector, if satisfied, to issue a certificate in relation to a growing crop which sets out the grade and variety of potatoes, the number of hectares planted, the certificate numbers (of the seeds from which the plants are grown) and that the crop meets the requirements of the grade. In the case of the applicants' seed potatoes, planted in more than thirty fields from some twenty-five or more certificated sources including at least sixteen sources other than the applicants' own seed, the practice followed by the inspector, as appears from his Bacterial Ring Rot Specimen Report and the Notices of Rejection and the reports of field inspection, was to treat the Griffins' various plantings as seventeen growing crops distinguished in each case by variety and grade of potatoes regardless of location of the fields in which they were planted.
[36]
In light of s. 52 of the Regulations and other sections relating to field crop inspection, the inspector concerned was bound to treat the seed potato plantings of the applicants as a number of growing crops and he did so. As we have seen, in the case of one growing crop he rejected it for "Ring Rot found in Volunteer Superior in your Shepody field Puisville Rd. (4.8)" and the sixteen other growing crops were "Rejected for Contact Ring Rot" in the case of three growing crops of Mary Ellen Griffin and thirteen others in the names of other family members were "Rejected for Contact Ring Rot from Mary E. Griffin".
[37]
It seems clear from examination of the Regulations that the authority of an inspector in considering certification of a growing crop is discretionary and that in the exercise of this discretion a number of factors may be relevant, as for example the grounds upon which certification is to be refused under s. 52(2). A number of factors must be considered in every case, for example the certified source of the seed, the variety and grade of seed, the inspector's observations about the quality of production and the limited or prohibited levels of contamination by disease or weed growth in a growing crop as set out in Schedule IV of the Regulations.
[38]
The respondent's submission is that once bacterial ring rot was discovered the inspector had no discretion, under s. 52(2)(d) and in light of departmental policy he was bound to refuse certification for all crops grown by the applicants. In support of this submission reference is made to s. 50(3)(g) of the Regulations and to Schedules IV and VI. Schedule IV is directly related to the standards for certification of growing crops under s. 52. However, s. 50(3)(g) sets out one ground for refusing to inspect a growing crop, it does not relate to the criteria for certification or refusal of certification once inspections have been made, and moreover it requires that an inspector have reason to believe that equipment used to plant or cultivate a crop is contaminated with pathogens detrimental to the crop, in this case pathogens of bacterial ring rot, and no basis for such a belief is here alleged. Schedule VI of the Regulations, while it generally indicates the serious nature of the disease, does not refer directly to certification or rejection of a growing crop. Rather, it defines the standards set for tubers, amplifying s. 48 of the Regulations, which are to be sold for seed in bulk under s. 56 or sold under s. 57 with prior permission if the standards of Schedule VI are not met. In the context Schedule VI appears to relate to tubers after harvest rather than to the discretion of an inspector to certify or reject a growing crop.
[39]
Whatever the status of the policy guidelines, which is discussed below, it seems clear that the Regulations themselves insofar as they provide for inspection of a growing crop vest discretion in an inspector in relation to each growing crop. In this case, while the growing volunteer Superior stock which tested positive is accepted as sufficient ground to reject certification of the growing crop of the Shepody variety in which it was found, at least from the same field, that in itself was not an appropriate ground under s. 52(2)(d) to reject certification for the other sixteen growing crops in production by the Griffin family. There is no evidence that bacterial ring rot was present in any of those other growing crops.
[40]
Yet each of the other crops was refused certification and was rejected for "contact ring rot". What factors were taken into account by the inspector in coming to his conclusion are not clear from the record. We do know that he took the sample of volunteer Superior plants, submitted it to the laboratory and apparently learned of the positive test for bacterial ring rot. He was aware also, from records and observation, of the varieties and grades of potatoes grown by the applicants, where those were planted and the sources by certification number of the seed used. He may have known something of the Griffin family's farming practices, he may even have been aware that machinery was used in common for the work required for some or all of the applicants' operations, but such knowledge as he may have had did not come directly from the Griffins for no inquiry was made of them. Finally, I infer the inspector was aware of general departmental policy, indeed the respondent acknowledged in argument that he relied upon it even though he may not have been aware of the published text of policy guidelines in Seed Potato Certification Circular No. 9, now relied upon.
[41]
Counsel for the respondent acknowledged in argument that the basis of the decisions made to reject, under s. 52(2)(d) of the Regulations, all of the growing crops of seed potatoes raised by the Griffin family was the written policy directive, Seed Potato Certification Circular No. 9. Resolution of the issue between the parties requires consideration of the status to be acknowledged for this policy guideline or directive, its appropriate place in relation to the discretion vested in an inspector by the Regulations, and the exercise of that discretion in a manner consistent with the principle of fairness.
[42]
Counsel for the respondent acknowledged that such a policy statement is not law but he submitted that provided the policy is within the scope of legislated authority it is not inherently wrong. Indeed it is a recognized method by which "uniform direction" is communicated by senior officers to those performing operational functions. Counsel referred to Martineau and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 129 S.C.R., where Pigeon, J., referred to the inherent authority of an administrator to issue administrative directions. While the learned Justice's comments are helpful, in my view, Martineau (No. 1), referred to, is not apposite to the issues here for in that case the Commissioner of Penitentiaries was specifically authorized by statute to make rules or directives and in this case, no comparable authority is vested under the Seeds Act in any administrator, except that the Minister is authorized under s. 4(2) to determine by order the species of plants the seeds of which he deems to be weed seeds under the Act, a matter not relevant in this case. Moreover, we are not concerned here, as the Supreme Court of Canada was  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (No. 1) to resolve whether the directives are "of an administrative nature not required by law to be made on a judicial or quasi-judicial basis" for purposes of assessing access to the Court of Appeal under s. 28 of the Federal Court Act, supra.
[43]
Counsel for the applicants acknowledged the capacity or inherent authority of a senior administrator to issue policy guidelines for guidance of those concerned with operational functions. As he indicated, this authority, even in the absence of specific statutory authorization, has been recognized by the Supreme Court of Canada in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(3d) 558. In that case McIntyre, J., for the court, discusses the authority of the Minister concerned to issue policy directives even without specific statutory authority and the effect of those directives in the exercise of discretion vested in the Minister under the Export and Import Permits Act, then R.S.C. 1970, c. E-17. He said, at pp. 6-7 S.C.R., pp. 561-562 D.L.R.:
"The discretion is given by the statute and the formulation and adoption of general policy guidelines cannot confine it. There is nothing improper or unlawful for the Minister charged with responsibility for the administration of the general scheme provided for in the Act and Regulations to formulate and to state general requirements for the granting of import permits. It will be helpful to applicants for permits to know in general terms what the policy and practice of the Minister will be."
He then quotes from the judgment of Le Dain, J., when the matter was considered in the Federal Court of Appeal (reported [1981] 1 F.C. 500, at pp. 513-514; 114 D.L.R.(3d) 634 at p. 645), a judgment which McIntyre, J., adopted in its entirety:
"The Minister may validly and properly indicate the kind of considerations by which he will be guided as a general rule in the exercise of his discretion ..., but he cannot fetter his discretion by treating the guidelines as binding upon him and excluding other valid or relevant reasons for the exercise of his discretion ..."
[44]
In my view there can be no doubt of the authority inherent in administrative officers concerned with administration of the laws, at the Ministerial or any other levels in public administration, to formulate policy guidelines for the exercise of discretionary authority vested in them or in their subordinates. Further, unless there be specific statutory directions it is not appropriate for a court to consider the internal authority within a public department or agency upon which such policy directives may be issued, at any level, including that of the responsible Minister. Such questioning is a matter for internal control within a department or agency, and at all levels is subject ultimately to administrative and political controls through the executive or legislative branches of government.
[45]
There are however two aspects of policy statements or directives with which a court may be concerned. Are the policy guidelines in question consistent with the administrative authority granted by legislation and regulations, and in practice are the guidelines used for guidance by those who have responsibility for discretionary decisions or are they relied upon, in the interests of consistency, as a basis for decisions without considering all factors that should be taken into account in reaching discretionary decisions? The latter situation is sometimes discussed in terms of failure to exercise discretion and sometimes in terms of policy statements which are found to fetter discretion. Both concepts arise from the law's recognition that discretionary power vested by legislation, including regulations, is to be exercised in relation to each case presented for decision to the authority concerned. Neither concept negates reliance upon predetermined policy statements, guidelines or directives as one of the factors that will be considered in exercising discretionary power, both concepts preclude exclusive reliance upon policy statements and ignoring other factors relevant to the exercise of the discretion conferred.
[46]
In this case counsel for the applicants submitted that the directives contained in the department Circular No. 9 should have been included in the Seeds Regulations but argument was not directed to the question of whether the policy guidelines contained in that departmental Circular are consistent with the administrative authority established under the Seeds Act and Regulations thereunder. This was a prerequisite condition recognized by counsel for the respondent in relying upon the Circular. Without deciding this issue, I note in passing serious reservations. The Seeds Regulations vest discretion in an inspector in relation to each growing crop but item 1 of Circular No. 9 "proposes" procedures for rejection of "all crops" in three circumstances:
1) all crops in which bacterial ring rot is found, reflecting the Regulations s. 52(2)(d),
2) all crops produced with the use of the same machinery whether on the same farm or not, a situation which reflects the Regulations s. 52(2)(c) except that it does not allow certification, as the Regulations would, where the machinery or equipment used had been disinfected to the satisfaction of an inspector, and
3) all potato crops on the same farm, a situation which does not directly reflect any of the grounds set out in s. 52(2) of the Regulations, but which might in particular cases be relevant to the opinion of the inspector under s. 52(2)(d) that the crops have been contaminated by bacterial ring rot. The same comment would apply to the Inspection Manual, Seed Potatoes, s. 6.2.2 so far as it relates to all crops on the same farm.
Item 2 of Circular No. 9 also raises some question about consistency with the Act and Regulations for it would appear to fix a practice that is not provided for under s. 52(2), a practice warranted only if the opinion of an inspector under s. 52(2)(d), in light of scientific knowledge of the disease, could be reasonably based on the circumstances outlined in Item 2. Item 3 in the Circular does appear to reflect circumstances set out in s. 52(2)(e) of the Regulations, but in a context involving production from the same seed source in more than one province or "in an area greatly removed from the original source". I note Item 3 does not provide, as does the regulation it appears to reflect, a process for "microscopic examination, or other laboratory method approved by the Minister" to establish freedom from bacterial ring rot.
[47]
At least in some respects these policy guidelines or directives established in the department to foster consistency in the practices of inspectors appear to extend the authority provided by the Regulations. That authority, discretionary, is to consider all relevant factors and to make a decision to certify or to reject each growing crop. The guidelines or directives appear to suggest that a single decision should be made or that the same decisions be made for all seed potato crops growing on the same farm or grown in circumstances where the same equipment is used to plant, cultivate or otherwise handle more than one crop, whether on the same farm or not, apparently without regard to any steps that might have been taken to disinfect the machinery or equipment used. Insofar as the guidelines are not fully consistent with the Regulations as enacted I have no doubt that the authority of the Governor-in-Council under s. 4(1) of the Seeds Act is sufficiently broad to accomplish the same objectives by regulations formally adopted. Yet the scope of authority vested in the Governor-in-Council by the Act does not extend the authority of any officer of the administering department including the Minister responsible, to make and follow guidelines that are not clearly consistent with the statute or Regulations as enacted.
[48]
The relationship of regulations and policy guidelines or directives established for their application is important in another respect. To the extent that the guidelines may affect the substantive rights of individuals, as their application in this case would at least in relation to the sixteen growing crops about which there is no evidence of the presence of bacterial ring rot, there is much to be said for inclusion of those matters in the Regulations formally adopted. They should not be contained only in departmental guidelines or directives which after the passage of time may not be readily known even to the administrators concerned or to those affected by their application, as appears to have been the case here. I am persuaded that there is much in the comments of Macdonald, J.A., in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 123 A.P.R. 138; 2 Admin. L.R. 260, at pp. 278-279 Admin. L.R. (N.S.C.A.), though made in the context of a different statutory regime, where he stressed the importance of matters affecting substantive rights being included in Regulations, if not included in the relevant statute itself, and not merely in guidelines which are not readily available to those likely to be affected by their application. As a final note, it is worth mention that inclusion in the Regulations of the full practices sought to be followed by the department in dealing with bacterial ring rot under the Seeds Act, at least insofar as these affect the individual producer, would be consistent with the objectives of the Regulatory Reform Strategy, including the Citizens' Code of Regulatory Fairness, adopted by the Government of Canada in 1987.
[49]
In this case the full regulatory regime is not set out in the Seeds Regulations and the respondent relies upon departmental directives or guidelines. The respondent's motion record acknowledges that "the decision to reject the entire Griffin Family potato crop for certification under the Seeds Act ... was indeed made pursuant to a written policy directive, which provided guidance and direction to potato inspectors in performing their duties ...". As noted earlier the respondent's motion record indicates "that once the disease had been found on the applicants' operation that there being a 'nil tolerance' for this disease set out in the legislation that the particular potato inspector had no discretion in the circumstances". Further, in the affidavit of the Program Officer, McSwain, upon which the respondent relies, it is stated:
"The applicant has in his affidavit raised the issue of unequal treatment or application of the policy of 'nil tolerance' by Agriculture Canada in the past. It is true that there were instances in P.E.I. where this occurred, but this should not have happened. The particular officer of Agriculture Canada who allowed that to happen has been relieved of his responsibilities for potato inspection, in part, because of having done so."
[50]
I note that no argument was addressed by the respondent to the issue as raised by the applicants, that is that the authority of the inspector under the Regulations is discretionary to be exercised in relation to each growing crop inspected. Nor was any argument directed by the respondent to the matter of the opinion of the inspector concerned in deciding, in relation to each crop other than that where contaminated volunteer plants were found, that the crop had been contaminated with bacterial ring rot, an essential requirement for refusing certification under s. 52(2)(d) of the Regulations.
[51]
In these circumstances it seems clear that the policy directive of the department was considered to be binding on inspectors and that their discretion ought not to be exercised, or that in another sense it was bound to be exercised to refuse certification for all crops of the applicants when bacterial ring rot was discovered even in a volunteer plant growing in one of their fields. That is inconsistent with the discretionary authority of the inspector vested by the Regulations. In my view the applicants' argument that discretion was not here exercised, or was fettered, by reliance upon departmental policy directives must prevail. Policy directives may not be so binding, as noted earlier in the comments of MacIntyre, J., in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Admin. L.R. 59 (see especially Wilson, J., for the court at pp. 174-176 S.C.R., pp. 69-70 Admin. L.R.). Among other authorities cited by the applicants in support of this argument were Re Lloyd and Superintendent of Motor Vehicles (1971), 20 D.L.R.(3d) 181 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  the courts concerned found failure to exercise discretion lawfully on the part of agencies vested with statutory discretion because of reliance upon predetermined policies or policy guidelines.
[52]
If my finding is not shared that the inspector concerned here failed to exercise discretion taking into account all relevant factors in that he acted solely upon departmental directives, or alternatively if it be considered that the inspector's entries on Rejection Notices and Reports of Field Inspection are evidence that he did form an opinion as required by s. 52(2)(d) of the Regulations, I turn to the second argument raised by the applicants. It is submitted the inspector's decisions to reject all of the applicants' crops were not consistent with modern principles of fairness applicable to administrative decisions in light of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(3d) 385; 13 C.R.(3d) 1.
[53]
In particular, it is here argued that the applicants were denied a fair hearing, not necessarily a formal hearing but an opportunity to be heard, to be apprised of departmental policy and to have an opportunity to present their case as to why it should not be applied to them, before the decisions were made to reject all of their crops. It would be naive to believe that the applicants were completely ignorant of departmental practice following their experience in 1986, even if they were ignorant then and until this application of the specific policy directives on which that practice was based. It is, however, argued that in the 1988 circumstances, when the disease was detected in a volunteer plant not planted by the applicants in that or the previous year they ought to be heard in relation to their planting, cultivating, spraying, disinfection and any other relevant management practices before the decisions were made in relation to all of their growing crops from all of their more than 30 fields. Counsel for the respondent submitted in argument that there is no requirement for a hearing and moreover that there was an opportunity to be heard at the September meeting between counsel for the applicants and departmental representatives. The latter suggestion is without merit for the decisions in question must be taken as made on August 18, the date the inspector concerned completed the Rejection Notices and the Reports of Field Inspection rejecting each one of the applicants' seventeen crops.
[54]
Was there a duty on the part of the inspector to enquire about the farming practices of the applicants and to provide an opportunity for them to produce information relevant to the decisions he would make about certification or rejection of the crops before his decisions were made? There was no argument about the need for further inquiry in relation to the crop growing in the field containing the contaminated volunteer plants. There can be no serious doubt about the inspector's opinion under s. 52(2)(d) of the Regulations concerning that crop growing in that field after he had received the report from the laboratory tests.
[55]
As for the other sixteen growing crops of the applicants I agree with the respondent that the Regulations do not require a formal hearing before a decision is made in each case. However, if the inspector is to form an opinion as s. 52(2)(d) of the Regulations requires he can only do so fairly by taking into account all relevant information. Two things are clear: there was no evidence before this court of the presence of bacterial ring rot in any of the sixteen growing crops in question here, and at least the Program Officer whose affidavit the respondent relies upon was aware that equipment was used in common in the applicants' operations, an awareness not attributed to the inspector concerned and not derived from any inquiry made of the applicants. The latter suggests a basis for rejection of certification based on s. 52(2)(c) where "any community or custom equipment was used ... without being disinfected to the satisfaction of an inspector". That section surely implies that before basing a decision on that ground, the inspector concerned must enquire about disinfection procedures and find them unsatisfactory. If that factor is the basis of any opinion formed by the inspector acting under s. 52(2)(d) it would similarly require some inquiry of the growers about disinfection practices. If it is not the basis of the concerned inspector's opinion we are left only with the policy directives of the department as the basis for his opinion and that as I have indicated would be an abrogation of the responsibility to consider all relevant factors in the exercise of discretion under s. 52(2)(d).
[56]
The legislative and policy regime for approving seed potatoes for sale under the Seeds Act imposes a basic inspection and licensing system. As it would be with any other licensing scheme, the individual seeking to qualify for license, or certification in this case, is entitled to know in full the requirements or standards established and to have opportunity to demonstrate or to make representations that he meets the standards. Insofar as the standards or their application depend upon policy directives designed to foster consistency in dealing with individual cases, he or she is entitled to know the policy directives and to have opportunity to provide information, to demonstrate or to make representations that the policy ought not to apply in the particular case. The decision maker is not entitled to decide on the basis of policy directives not known to the applicant: see  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  the interested person's qualifications or practices without making inquiry of that person and providing an opportunity for response.
[57]
This does not imply any necessity for a formal hearing. It does imply that the decision maker, here the inspector concerned, should apprise the grower of all of the requirements for certification, including those contained in departmental policy directives and the conditions of the field crops as he finds them, then provide a reasonable opportunity for the grower to submit information and representations relevant to the application of the requirements in his case. Finally, the inspector is required to consider all relevant information and representations before deciding how the discretion vested in him or her is to be exercised. It is sufficient if processes to provide for these steps are informal, but procedures of this sort designed to provide fairness in the application of the inspection and licensing system for seed certification would seem to me to be essential in light of the principles enunciated  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (No. 2), supra, and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(3d) 671.
[58]
The procedures followed in this case, already reviewed, provided no opportunity for the applicants' to be apprised of the full requirements for certification or any opportunity for them to respond with information or representations about their practices in producing potatoes in 1988 before decisions were made to reject all of their crops. In the circumstances, particularly since bacterial ring rot was found only in a sample of tubers from volunteer plants not planted for seed in 1988, the procedures of the respondent did not meet minimum standards of fairness.
Conclusion
[59]
While bacterial ring rot is obviously a serious disease in seed potato production, and the processes of the department in containing its incidence are designed to protect the interests of all growers, including the applicants, the consequences of decisions to refuse certification where there is not available scientific evidence of the presence of the disease in a given growing crop are so serious that there is a necessity for appropriate procedures to be followed.
[60]
In this case I conclude that the procedures followed in relation to consideration of certification for sixteen growing crops which did not have evidence of the presence of the disease resulted in a failure on the part of the inspector concerned to properly exercise the discretion vested in him by the Seeds Regulations. Policy directives of the department, relied upon as the basis for his decisions, effectively fettered the exercise of discretion. Moreover, in failing to provide full information about the application of standards and failing to provide an opportunity for the applicants to indicate how they met the standards, before decisions were made to reject their sixteen growing crops, the procedures followed did not comply with principles of fairness necessary even in the exercise of discretionary authority.
[61]
In the result the applicants' motion for an order of certiorari is allowed in relation to decisions made on 18 August 1988, by the inspector under the Seeds Regulations in regard to sixteen growing crops of seed potatoes planted by the applicants for which at that time there was no evidence of the presence of bacterial ring rot.
Application allowed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/blk
[End of document]