[1]
Strayer, J.
: This is an application by the respondent in the above proceedings pursuant to rule 704(7) for an order authorizing it to cross-examine Robert Feldman, Henry Cho, June Keane, Arthur Gelb, Howard Hafetz, Sol Bienstock and Jerome Axelrod on their respective affidavits filed by the appellant. The above-named proceedings consist of an appeal against the decision of the Registrar of Trademarks to register the trademark "Jerome Alexander" in the name of the respondent.
[2]
The notice of motion in the present application states as follows:
"The grounds of the motion are that the affidavits are ambiguous, vague, susceptible of different interpretations and express opinions in an expert or quasi-expert manner as set forth in the affidavit of Susan Beaubien filed in support hereof. In relation to the affidavit of Robert Feldman the respondent relies upon the further ground that the said affidavit indicates that the appellant's standing in this appeal is based on an alleged agreement which has the effect of depriving creditors of an asset of a bankrupt company as set out in the affidavit of Susan Beaubien."
With it was filed the affidavit of Susan D. Beaubien. That affidavit states that the respondent "seeks leave to cross-examine the said affiants on the basis of the matters hereinafter set forth". There then follows specific statements by Ms. Beaubien concerning each of the affidavits on which cross-examination is sought. These statements refer to specific paragraphs or parts of paragraphs of the affidavits and in each case explain why cross-examination is sought. The reason in each case is either that the statement referred to is ambiguous or that it expresses an opinion the basis for which is not provided, or both. In addition, with respect to the Feldman affidavit it is indicated that the respondent wishes to ask questions about the legality of the alleged assignment of a trademark. In the context I believe this can also be seen as a matter of clarification.
[3]
Initially counsel for the parties reached an agreement in principle by which a consent order would be sought to authorize cross-examination, but then a difference emerged as to the scope of the examination to be allowed. The appellant has no objection to cross-examination of the deponents of its affidavits with respect to the particular matters referred to in the affidavit of Susan Beaubien. The respondent, however, now seeks the right (as described in a draft order) to cross-examine with respect to:
"... all the material sworn in the affidavits, the relevant [sic] questions logically arising from the answers given to the cross-examinations and to any matters relevant to determination of the issues in respect of which the affidavits were filed."
The general principles applicable are clear with respect to appeals, under rule 704, of decisions of the Registrar of Trademarks. Such appeals are summary in nature. Evidence is to be submitted by affidavit within clearly defined time limits and normally only one set of affidavits is permitted to each party. The submission of any further evidence can only be by special leave of the court. Further, by rule 704(7) there can be no cross-examination on affidavits without the leave of the court. The jurisprudence is clear that the onus is on an applicant for leave to cross-examine to show special circumstances why cross-examination is required. Normally such circumstances are not found to exist unless there are ambiguities in the affidavit in question or opinions are expressed therein the basis for which require exploration by the other party. Otherwise it is normally accepted that the way for a respondent to answer the appellant's affidavits is to submit its own affidavits which qualify or contradict the affidavits of the appellant [see footnote 1].
[4]
The respondent who seeks leave to cross-examine in this case does not dispute the above general principles. Instead, its counsel argues in effect that once it is established that there are matters in the affidavits justifying leave for cross-examination, then cross-examination cannot be limited but must extend to all matters normally subject to cross-examination where a party is entitled to cross-examine on an affidavit filed in ordinary litigation. This includes all matters covered by the affidavit and all matters related to issues with respect to which the affidavit was originally filed. In other words he contends that an order under rule 704(7) giving leave to cross-examine must give all the rights of cross-examination which a party normally has, without leave, to cross-examine on an affidavit filed in a normal court proceeding.
[5]
I am unable to accede to this suggestion. Given the general nature of proceedings under rule 704, I believe the rational interpretation to put on rule 704(7) is that not only should cross-examination on affidavits be limited to cases where there are special circumstances, but it is at least open to the court to restrict the scope of cross-examination to meet the requirements of those special circumstances.
[6]
I have examined carefully several authorities cited by counsel for the respondent but I can find in them no clear authority for the proposition advanced by counsel. Some stress was put on decisions of my learned colleague Walsh, J., in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  which he stressed the need of balancing the summary nature of these proceedings against the desirability of the judge having before him "all information which is relevant and material to enable him to make a proper decision". I respectfully agree with that view but in the present case the respondent has done nothing to demonstrate that full cross-examination on all these affidavits is required to enable the judge who hears this appeal to have full access to all information which is relevant and material. All the respondent has done in the affidavit of Ms. Beaubien is to demonstrate that cross-examination is required to clear up certain specified ambiguities and to seek the basis for certain specified opinions stated by the affiants. Reliance was also placed on the decision of my colleague Muldoon, J., in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  upon which the affiant had knowledge and which related to the issue with respect to which the affidavit was filed. I believe that case is distinguishable as Muldoon, J., was not faced with the same issue as I have before me. In that case the parties had agreed to cross-examination on the affidavit and an order was issued, apparently in general terms, giving leave to cross-examine. Counsel for the party whose affidavits were the subject of cross-examination later sought to limit the scope of that cross-examination by relying on a rather ambiguous sentence included by him in a letter to opposing counsel confirming his client's consent to cross-examination. Muldoon, J., declined to give effect to that ambiguous reservation. While he refers to general principles concerning the obligation of affiants to subject themselves to cross-examination and cites the decisions of Walsh, J., referred to above, it was not necessary in that case for him to consider what the situation would have been had an order originally been issued for a restricted right of cross-examination. Since that decision, leave has been granted in this court under rule 704(7) restricting cross-examination to certain parts of an affidavit [see footnote 5].
[7]
There was some dispute as to whether the notice of motion in the present application had requested leave in such broad terms as counsel for the respondent now seeks. Without resolving that issue I find that the respondent in its application has not made out a case for an order in such broad terms. The evidence which it has submitted in the form of the affidavit of Ms. Beaubien demonstrates a need for cross-examination because of ambiguities and lack of support for opinions stated in the affidavits of the appellant's affiants. It has thus demonstrated the need for cross-examination with respect to these matters. It has not produced evidence to demonstrate that further cross-examination is needed in order for the judge hearing the appeal to have "full access to all information which is relevant and material" as referred to by Walsh, J., in the Ethicon case. Thus it has not met the onus on it to demonstrate the need for such a wide-ranging cross-examination as it now requests.
[8]
Therefore I will give leave to the respondent to cross-examine the affiants named in the notice of motion with respect to the portions of their affidavits, and for the purposes, referred to in the affidavit of Susan Beaubien, with of course the right to ask associated questions arising out of answers given on such cross-examination.
[9]
As the appellant had already agreed to an order along these lines before the respondent sought to overreach the bounds of its own application for leave, the appellant is entitled to costs of this motion.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/blk
Footnotes
1. See e.g., Chocosuisse Union des  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 208 (F.C.A.).
2. (1977), 35 C.P.R.(2d) 126.
3. (1980), 59 C.P.R.(2d) 139.
4. (1984), 79 C.P.R.(2d) 59.
5. See e.g.,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (A.S.P.), confirmed (1987), 12 C.I.P.R. 22 (T.D.).
[End of document]