Reasons For Order
[1]
Wetston, J.
: This is an application, pursuant to s. 18.1 of the
Federal Court Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7, for an Order setting aside the decision of visa officer Alexander Stewart Acheson (the "visa officer"), dated March 8, 1994, refusing the applicant's application for permanent residence in Canada as an Assisted Relative with a Family Business Job Offer and for an Order directing the respondent to reconsider the application in accordance with the
Immigration Act
, R.S.C., 1985, c. I-2 as amended, and the
Immigration Regulations
, 1978, SOR/78-172 as amended.
Preliminary Issue
[2]
The respondent takes issue with the affidavit of Anita Oi Ying Ho, the applicant's sister, submitted in support of the applicant's originating notice of motion. The respondent submits this affidavit should be struck on the basis that it does not contain facts within the sister's knowledge but rather is based on information and belief, contrary to Federal Court Rule 332(1).
[3]
The applicant argues that the precise wording of rule 1603(1), which governs the filing of affidavits in judicial review proceedings, clearly contemplates affidavit evidence being provided by more than simply the applicant. Rule 1603(1) reads:
"1603(1) At the time of filing the notice of motion, the applicant shall also file one or more affidavits verifying the facts relied on by the applicant."
[4]
While the respondent argues that only evidence submitted by the applicant herself can be of probative value, it must not be forgotten that Anita Oi Ying Ho submitted both a Family Business Job Offer and an Undertaking of Assistance on her sister's behalf. While rule 1603(1) allows for more than one affidavit being filed in support of an application for judicial review, it does not allow that those affidavits be based on information and belief. Consequently, those paragraphs in the affidavit of Anita Oi Ying Ho concerning the applicant's interview in Hong Kong, as they are clearly based on information and belief, are struck.
Background
[5]
On August 10, 1992, the applicant's sister, Anita Oi Ying Ho, submitted a Family Business Job Offer proposal to the Calgary office of the Canada Immigration Centre (the "CIC"). By letter dated September 2, 1992, Calgary CIC immigration counsellor R. Geekie advised the applicant's sister that she had favourably reviewed the proposal concerning the applicant becoming a partner in the small family-run grocery store in Calgary. This letter explicitly pointed out that, while the proposal had been approved, there was no guarantee of admission to Canada unless the applicant could also comply with the requirements of the
Immigration Act
and
Regulations
.
[6]
Following the positive business proposal review and prior to Bill C-86 coming into force, amending the
Immigration Act
and
Regulations
, 1978, the applicant submitted her Application for Permanent Residence in Canada to the High Commission for Canada in Hong Kong. In support of the application, the High Commission in Hong Kong received an Undertaking of Assistance dated August 10, 1992, from the applicant's sister, and a copy of the September 2, 1992 CIC letter approving the Family Business Job Offer proposal.
[7]
In accordance with s. 8 and s. 10(1)(b.1)(i) of the
Regulations
, 1978, the applicant was paper screened on October 19, 1993 in the assisted relative category. As an assisted relative under the 1978
Regulations
, the applicant required an award of 55 units of assessment (without the 15 bonus units for an Undertaking of Assistance). Had the post Bill C-86 Regulations been applied, pursuant to s. 10(1)(b), the applicant would have required 65 units of assessment (without bonus units). On the basis of those factors listed in Column I of Schedule I, the paper screening resulted in the applicant being awarded a total of 43 units of assessment (without the 15 bonus units for the Undertaking of Assistance).
[8]
The visa officer deposes that because the applicant had a Family Business Job Offer, she was invited to a personal interview to assess whether the 43 units awarded by paper screening were accurate and to determine whether a positive exercise of discretion, pursuant to s. 11(3)(a) of the
Regulations
, was warranted.
[9]
The January 24, 1994 interview was conducted through an interpreter and resulted in the applicant being awarded a total 47 units, without the 15 bonus units for her Undertaking of Assistance. In the visa officer's opinion, the assessment accurately reflected the applicant's ability to successfully settle in Canada. On that basis, the visa officer determined that the applicant did not warrant an exercise of positive discretion, pursuant to s. 11(3)(a) of the
Regulations
.
Issues
[10]
The issues raised by this application are:
1.	Did the Visa Officer err in failing to fairly and completely assess the applicant's November 20, 1992 application for Permanent Residence In Canada?
2.	Did the Visa Officer err in failing to exercise his discretion, pursuant to s. 11(3)(a) of the
Regulations
, in favour of the applicant?
[11]
At the conclusion of the hearing, I asked counsel to provide written submissions with respect to s. 11(3)(a) of the
Regulations
and whether the visa officer's obligation thereunder is mandatory or permissive. Both the applicant and the respondent submitted further written representations.
Analysis
[12]
As submitted by the respondent, to succeed, the applicant must establish that the visa officer erred in his interpretation of the
Act
or
Regulations
and consequently failed to carry out the assessment required of him, or, alternatively, that in assessing the applicant, he failed in his duty of fairness:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.) at pages 260 and 261.
[13]
Counsel for the applicant contends that in assessing the applicant, in accordance with Column I of Schedule I, the visa officer failed to award the proper units for item 1 "Education". The applicant submits that by awarding 9 of a possible 12 units, the visa officer erred in not counting but in simply adopting the applicant's application calculation. In the applicant's submission either she made an error in calculation or she did not claim years for which she did not have certificates in her possession. The applicant submits she does in fact have 4 years of secondary education.
[14]
I cannot find that the visa officer failed to fairly assess the applicant by relying on the information contained in the applicant's application. Clearly, the visa officer is entitled to rely on the applicant's calculation and cannot be said to have erred by not independently calculating the applicant's years of education. Despite counsel's explanation and assurance that the applicant does indeed have 4 years of secondary education, reference to question 15 of the application appears to support the visa officer who could only have arrived at the same calculation.
[15]
Secondly, the applicant argues the visa officer erred in his assessment of item 9 of Schedule I, "Personal Suitability", by awarding the applicant only 4 of a possible 10 units. The applicant submits that the visa officer has failed to consider the appropriate criteria upon which to base his opinion and as such he has erred.
[16]
In the applicant's submission, the visa officer failed to consider that the applicant has 20 years experience in her occupation, that she is a single parent, that she will have $340,000 in assets to bring to Canada, and that she lives in a British Colony with a similar legal system to that in Canada. The applicant also submits that the visa officer failed to consider that Calgary has the third largest Chinese community in Canada and that as such she will not be completely dependent on her relatives to access day to day services. Finally, the applicant submits the visa officer appears to have considered the applicant's language deficiency in his item 9 assessment.
[17]
The applicant also argues that, contrary to s. 11(3) of the
Regulations
, which requires a mandatory exercise of discretion, the visa officer slavishly adhered to the factors listed in Column I of Schedule I and, in particular, failed to put his mind to s. 11(3)(a). Furthermore, the applicant submits that when s. 11(3)(a) is read in conjunction with ss. 1.18 and 1.35 of the Immigration Policy Manual, the applicant, as an assisted relative with a Family Business Job Offer, clearly meets the aim and spirit of the
Act
and warranted a positive exercise of the visa officer's discretion.
[18]
In order to determine whether the visa officer failed to fairly assess the applicant's application, in accordance with the Schedule I items, or failed to exercise his discretion in favour of the applicant, it is important to look at the role of the visa officer.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), a case dealing with an immigration officer's discretion under s. 114(2) of the
Act
, Hugessen, J., at page 2, recognizes that where the law establishes criteria, like in Schedule I, and the applicant can meet those criteria, certain rights arise. The question then is did the applicant meet the criteria.
[19]
I think it is important to consider paragraph 21 of the visa officer's affidavit, where he explains his assessment of item 9, "Personal Suitability":
"21. I awarded Ms. Ho 4 units of assessment for 'Personal Suitability' as during the interview, Ms. Ho had demonstrated little knowledge of Canada or that she possessed the necessary life skills of adaptability, motivation, initiative and resourcefulness to settle successfully in Canada. Her situation in Hong Kong was that of a cashier where she was familiar with local language, laws and customs. In Canada Ms. Ho would be totally dependent on her relatives in Canada to assist her in accessing local services on a day to day basis."
It appears that in the visa officer's opinion, because of the applicant's unfamiliarity with local language (English and/or French), laws and customs, she would be completely dependent on her sister in accessing day to day services. Moreover, the visa officer merely quotes the criteria to be considered in item 9: adaptability, motivation, initiative and resourcefulness.
[20]
Personal Suitability is meant to encompass factors not already specifically assessed in the other Schedule I items. In this instance, the visa officer appears to have simply listed those criteria in Column II of Schedule I. It is not clear on the face of the record that the visa officer considered and assessed those criteria. Furthermore, the visa officer appears to have erred by considering the applicant's language deficiency in assessing personal suitability. Knowledge of English and French is specifically assessed at item 8 of Schedule I. In this instance, the applicant was awarded 3 units of a possible 15. It is therefore, not open to the visa officer to consider language in assessing the applicant pursuant to item 9. As Mahoney, J.A., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm.L.R.(2d) 167 (F.C.A.) at 170 stated:
"In my opinion, the point assessment provided by the Schedule cannot be said to take into account of the fact that an applicant ... has difficulty communicating in English and no French at all. Those considerations are properly to be taken into account in the awarding or withholding of units of assessment under those items of the Schedule and the visa officer had no discretion to take them into account in his assessment under item 9, Personal Suitability ..."
[21]
I am of the view that the visa officer has failed to appropriately assess the applicant under item 9 of Schedule I. It is therefore unnecessary for me to determine whether the visa officer's discretion under s. 11(3)(a) of the
Regulations
is mandatory or permissive.
[22]
However, I would note that I do not accept the applicant's contention that the visa officer erred in not exercising his discretion in accordance with the Immigration Policy Manual. As pointed out by the respondent, the manual merely provides policy guidelines and does not have the force of law. While it is open to the visa officer to consider the guidelines, I would note, as did Strayer, J., in
Vidal and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), an applicant cannot complain if an officer fails or refuses to follow the guidelines as long as the officer has exercised his discretion in good faith and those factors considered are not wholly irrelevant.
[23]
Accordingly, having determined that, on the face of the record, the visa officer failed to consider and assess the criteria in item 9 of Schedule I and that the visa officer erred in considering the applicant's language deficiencies in his assessment of "Personal Suitability", the decision dated March 8, 1994 is set aside and is referred back for review and reconsideration.
Application allowed.
Editor: Angela E. McKay/sg
[End of document]