 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (FC)
MLB unedited judgment
[French language version follows English language version]
[La version française vient à la suite de la version anglaise]
Zamir Shkabari, Antiana Shkabari, Ray Shkabari and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  CF 177)
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
Federal Court
O'Keefe, J.
February 8, 2012.
Counsel:
Michael Brodzky, for the applicants;
Norah Dorcine, for the respondent.
Solicitors of Record:
Michael Brodzky, Toronto, Ontario, for the applicants;
Myles J. Kirvan, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Toronto, Ontario, for the respondent.
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary. Any footnotes found in this case will appear below end of document.
[1]
O'Keefe, J.
: This is an application pursuant to subsection 72(1) of the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act
, SC 2001, c 27 (the Act) for judicial review of a decision of the Immigration and Refugee Board, Refugee Protection Division (the Board), dated June 9, 2011, wherein the applicants were determined to be neither Convention refugees within the meaning of section 96 of the Act nor persons in need of protection as defined in subsection 97(1) of the Act.
[2]
This conclusion was based on the Board's finding that the applicants' fear arising from a blood feud did not establish a nexus with the Convention refugee definition. In addition, the Board found that the applicants failed to provide both credible evidence to support central allegations of their claim and clear and convincing evidence of the state's inability to protect its citizens.
[3]
The applicants request that the Board's decision be set aside and the matter be referred back for a new hearing.
Background
[4]
The principal applicant is Zamir Shkabari. The other applicants are related to the principal applicant as follows: Antiana Shkabari, his wife; Ray Shkabari, his minor son and Ergi Shkabari, his minor son.
[5]
All the applicants are citizens of Albania, except Ray Shkabari, who was born in and is a citizen of the United States.
[6]
The principal applicant and his wife married in November 1998. After their marriage, they discovered that they were distant cousins (fifth generation). The principal applicant's parents accepted the marriage. However, Fiqri Mati, Antianas' father, insisted that the marriage brought shame and dishonour to his family as it was contrary to Kanun law (customary Albanian law) which prohibited marriage between cousins in the same blood line. The marriage also ran against Fiqri Mati's patriarchal prerogative to choose his daughter's spouse.
[7]
The principal applicant's father contacted elders (people versed in Kanun law), representatives of the blood reconciliation group and people from the local government for help in settling the conflict. However, Fiqri Mati refused to meet with them. He disowned his daughter and declared a blood feud against her and the principal applicant.
[8]
A week after the couple's marriage, the principal applicant returned to work at his family's small bar. Although this ran against the self-confinement measures generally taken by individuals in blood feuds, his employment at the bar was his only means to provide for his family.
[9]
Towards the end of November 1998, on the principal applicant's second day back to work after his wedding, two relatives of Fiqri Mati came to the bar and refused to pay for their purchases. When the principal applicant confronted them, they accosted him and hit him in the face. The men also threatened him, stating that they would make him pay for what he owed them. After this attack, the principal applicant's father consulted with elders and offered to pay Fiqri Mati a sum of money in compensation. Fiqri Mati refused these advances. The principal applicant then entered into self-confinement.
[10]
In March 1999, the principal applicant accompanied his mother to visit his aunt. When they were out, a police car without licence plates stopped in front of them and two men, believed to be cousins of Antiana, attempted to abduct the principal applicant. When his mother came to his assistance, the attackers let him go in fear of being dishonoured for touching a woman. Under Kanun law, avengers cannot strike a man who is in the company of a woman.
[11]
Later the same month, the principal applicant's father asked the blood reconciliation group representatives again to attempt to speak with Fiqri Mati. Again, Fiqri Mati refused their advances. The principal applicant and his wife therefore went into hiding with his godmother in the city of Tirana in March 1999. However, they continued to live in fear and faced financial difficulties there. Therefore, in April 2000, shortly before Antiana gave birth to their first son, the couple returned to the principal applicant's family home in the city of Shkoder.
[12]
In September 2000, when the principal applicant had gone to the pharmacy to pick up medication for his sick son, he was confronted by two masked men. They hit him and he lost consciousness. He woke later in the hospital. The principal applicant believed the two masked men were relatives of his wife.
[13]
The applicants did not report any of these three assaults to the police.
[14]
Thereafter, the principal applicant's father decided that the couple and their child had to flee Albania. He sold the family bar to raise the necessary funds. The principal applicant retained a smuggler who agreed to help the family flee to the United States.
[15]
The applicants fled to the United States in October 2000. There they filed refugee claims based on political reasons. Their claims were ultimately denied in 2008. In fear of their lives, the applicants moved to Canada on November 23, 2008 where they filed refugee claims.
[16]
The hearing of the applicants' claims was held on March 21, 2011.
Board's Decision
[17]
The Board issued its decision on June 9, 2011. In its decision, the Board determined that the applicants were not Convention refugees or persons in need of protection.
[18]
The Board first noted that the applicants' identities were established based on the evidence of their passports and birth certificates.
[19]
The Board then referred to a number of cases in finding that the applicants' fear associated with a blood feud did not establish a nexus with the Convention refugee definition because victims of criminality, including vendettas, do not meet the necessary nexus.
[20]
The Board also found that the applicants did not provide credible evidence to support central allegations of their claim. The Board noted the principal applicant's testimony that he had not gone into self-confinement after the feud was declared even though this was what male family members generally did when a blood feud was declared against them. This was exacerbated by the Board's finding that his parents could have operated the bar instead of the principal applicant putting himself at risk in so doing. Further, the Board noted that there was no evidence that the two men who had accosted him at the bar did any physical harm to him after the altercation. As such, the Board found that the principal applicant's actions after the declaration of the blood feud were inconsistent with his testimony on the risks he faced.
[21]
Turning to the question of state protection, the Board found that the applicants did not provide clear and convincing evidence of the state's inability to protect its citizens. The Board highlighted the principal applicant's failure to report the attacks in November 1998, March 1999 and September 2000 to the police.
[22]
The Board noted conflicting country documentation on the adequacy of state protection in Albania for victims of blood feuds. However, the Board granted significant weight to the May 2008 Issue Paper-Albania Blood Feuds report, which traced the conviction of members of an Albanian family who had travelled to the United Kingdom to carry out a blood feud. The Board found that this example provided a clear manifestation of a functioning crimes court, that blood feud killers were not let off or given light sentences, that an effective legislation and procedural framework existed and that there was both the capacity and will to effectively implement that framework. As such, the Board found insufficient evidence to indicate that the state would not be reasonably forthcoming with serious efforts to protect the principal applicant, if needed.
[23]
The Board also noted that Albania is a functioning parliamentary democracy with a constitutionally recognized independent judiciary. Nothing in the evidence before it suggested that Albania was in a state of complete breakdown. The Board found that the principal applicant had failed to establish that it was objectively reasonable for him not to seek protection from the authorities. It was not sufficient for the principal applicant not to seek protection solely because he did not believe it was available.
[24]
Given its credibility finding and its finding that the applicants had not rebutted the presumption of state protection, the Board found that the applicants would not face a risk to life or a risk to cruel and unusual treatment or punishment should they return to Albania. No evidence was adduced on a risk of torture. For these reasons, the Board rejected the applicants' claims.
Issues
[25]
The applicants submit the following points at issue:
1. Did the Board err in finding that no nexus existed to a Convention ground in the applicants' claims?
2. Did the Board err in finding that state protection is available to the applicants?
3. Did the Board fail to consider important evidence in the applicant's claims?
[26]
I would phrase the issues as follows:
1. What is the appropriate standard of review?
2. Did the Board err in finding no nexus to a Convention ground?
3. Did the Board err in determining that state protection was available to the applicants in Albania?
4. Did the Board err in its determination on credibility?
Applicants' Written Submissions
[27]
The applicants submit that the Board erred in finding a lack of nexus between their claims and a Convention ground. In particular, the Board erred by not considering the unique nature of the applicants' claims; namely, that they were based on a blood feud arising out of the prohibition of their marriage under Albanian customary law as opposed to out of vengeance for a violation of honour. By analyzing the applicants' claims based on a revenge based feud, the Board erred by misconstruing the central element of the applicants' claims.
[28]
The applicants submit that they face a risk of persecution as a result of their membership in the particular social group of persons whose marriage is prohibited under Albanian customary law. The right to marry freely is provided for under several international human rights instruments. This underlying reason for their blood feud lacks the reciprocal acts of violence that has previously led Courts to characterize acts committed in the context of blood feuds as vengeance.
[29]
In support, the applicants refer to the two-step process articulated in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  for determining whether persecution is by reason of membership in a particular social group. The first step assesses whether an issue of human rights or discrimination is engaged. The applicants submit that this first step is satisfied in this case because the right to freely choose one's partner and to form a family are fundamental human rights articulated in international instruments. The second step requires determining whether the persecution is caused by membership in the particular social group in issue. The applicants submit that they are being targeted due to their marriage and formation of a family contrary to Kanun law. It is therefore their membership in the particular social group of married couples that is the cause of their persecution.
[30]
The applicants submit that they presented facts and made submissions that explicitly distinguish their case from that of the more common Albanian revenge killing type blood feud. However, the Board failed to consider these and simply applied the reasoning regularly applied to blood feuds without considering the applicants' distinguishing circumstances.
[31]
The applicants submit in their further memorandum that the Board also erred by failing to consider in its reasons relevant post-hearing evidence on issues that the Board stated represented the crux of the applicants' claims. These issues pertained to the well-foundedness of the applicants' fear of persecution in Albania and the principal applicant's overall credibility.
[32]
Finally, the applicants submit that the Board erred in finding that state protection is available to them in Albania. The applicants submit that the Board selectively considered only two country documents while not considering other documents included both in the applicants' submissions and in the National Documentation Package on Albania. The Board also failed to address the specific arguments on this issue raised in the applicants' submissions. For example, the Board ignored the applicants' evidence on their unsuccessful efforts to obtain assistance through a peace and reconciliation commission set up to resolve blood feuds in Albania. The applicants submit that in a number of cases before this Court, evidence on the existence and involvement of peace and conciliation commissions has been deemed crucial to the proper determination of those cases.
Respondent's Written Submissions
[33]
The respondent submits that the Board correctly found that blood feuds do not have a nexus to the Convention definition. It is established jurisprudence that those involved in blood feuds are not considered members of a particular social group.
[34]
The respondent submits that the applicants' argument that the nature of their claim, namely, a blood feud arising from the opposition of their marriage under Albanian customary law as opposed to out of vengeance for a violation of honour, is without merit. Both reasons pertain to revenge killing, which do not qualify as a particular social group for Convention purposes.
[35]
Further, the respondent submits that the Board did not fail to consider the post-hearing submissions or the evidence on the issue of nexus. It is notable that the Board in fact requested documentation on the prohibition of marriage of distant cousins under Kanun law. Having explicitly stated that it considered the submissions on this point, the Board found that a family involved in blood feuds does not give rise to a claim under section 96 of the Act. The Board did not err in rendering this finding.
[36]
The respondent also submits that the Board reasonably concluded that the applicants did not provide credible evidence to support the central allegations of their claim. The respondent highlights that male members of a family are at risk when a blood feud is declared against the family. However, in this case, the blood feud was directed at the principal applicant and his wife. In addition, as noted by the Board, the principal applicant's actions in returning to work after the blood feud was declared were not consistent with the risk he allegedly feared. Further, as the applicants do not challenge the Board's credibility findings, these must be true. These alone are sufficient to reject the applicants' claims.
[37]
The respondent submits that the applicants also did not provide clear and convincing evidence of the state's inability to protect its citizens. By not taking all reasonable steps to seek protection in Albania, as evidenced by their failure to visit the police, the applicants failed to rebut the presumption of state protection.
[38]
Finally, the respondent submits that the Board was not selective in reviewing the evidence but rather acknowledged contradictory evidence. The respondent submits that the applicants' arguments pertain primarily to the Board's weighing of the evidence. This Court should not intervene unless there are gross errors or perverse findings of fact. The respondent submits that the applicants have not highlighted any cogent evidence that demonstrates that the Board erred in rendering its decision on state protection.
[39]
In summary, the respondent submits that the Board weighed the evidence reasonably and came to a reasonable conclusion.
Analysis and Decision
Issue 1
What is the appropriate standard of review?
[40]
Where previous jurisprudence has determined the standard of review applicable to a particular issue before the court, the reviewing court may adopt that standard (see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at paragraph 57).
[41]
It is established law that findings of nexus to a Convention ground under section 96 of the Act are questions of mixed fact and law that are reviewable on a standard of reasonableness (see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2011] FCJ No 968 at paragraph 15; and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2009] FCJ No 1300 (QL) at paragraph 27).
[42]
It is also established jurisprudence that credibility findings, described as the "heartland of the Board's jurisdiction", are essentially pure findings of fact that are reviewable on a reasonableness standard (see
Canada (Minister of Citizenship and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2009] SCJ No 12 at paragraph 46;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2011] FCJ No 786 at paragraph 23; and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2003] FCJ No 162 at paragraph 7).
[43]
Finally, assessments of findings on state protection and the interpretation of evidence raise questions of mixed fact and law that are also reviewable on a reasonableness standard (see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2007] FCJ No 584 at paragraph 38;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2010] FCJ No 650 at paragraph 16).
[44]
In reviewing the Board's decision on a standard of reasonableness, the Court should not intervene unless the Board came to a conclusion that is not transparent, justifiable and intelligible and within the range of acceptable outcomes based on the evidence before it (see <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> above, at paragraph 47; and <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> above, at paragraph 59). As the Supreme Court held in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> above, "it is not up to a reviewing court to substitute its own view of a preferable outcome, nor is it the function of the reviewing court to reweigh the evidence" (at paragraph 59).
Issue 2
Did the Board err in finding no nexus to a Convention ground?
[45]
The first requirement to qualify as a Convention refugee under section 96 of the Act is the establishment of a nexus with one of the five Convention refugee grounds. In this case, the applicants submit that their membership in a particular social group establishes the required nexus with a Convention ground. The applicants define this social group as comprising individuals prohibited from marrying freely under Albanian customary law (the Kanun).
[46]
The Board found that the applicants' fear arose from a blood feud. As such, they were victims of criminality, which the Board held did not establish a nexus with the Convention refugee definition. In support, the Board referred to the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2003] FCJ No 812.
[47]
In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> above, the applicants were also Albanian citizens who had sought refugee protection on the basis of the risk they faced as a result of a blood feud between two families. The Zefi family were pressuring the principal applicant to avenge her husband's death. Concurrently, if her husband's death was not avenged, the members of the Frani family had the right under the Kanun to kill another member of the Zefi family. As in this case, the applicants filed refugee claims on the basis of membership in a particular social group. However, in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> above, the particular social group was broadly defined as a family or clan involved in a blood feud.
[48]
Mr. Justice François Lemieux explained that the first step in the analysis of whether a refugee claimant could be classified within a particular social group is the determination of whether an issue exists that concerns basic human rights (see <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> above, at paragraph 36). Secondly, membership in that particular social group must be the cause of the well-founded fear of persecution (see <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> above, at paragraph 39). At paragraph 41, the Court concluded that:
Revenge killing in a blood feud has nothing to do with the defence of human rights -- quite to the contrary, such killings constitute a violation of human rights. Families engaged in them do not form a particular social group for Convention purposes. Recognition of a social group on this basis would have the anomalous result of according status to criminal activity, status because of what someone does rather than what someone is (see
Ward
, paragraph 69).
[49]
On this basis, the Board in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> above, denied the applicants' Convention refugee claims.
[50]
The applicants in this case criticize the Board's finding on the basis that the nature of their claim differs from that in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> above and other cases on blood feuds in Albania. Contrary to those cases, the blood feud in this case arose directly out of the prohibition of their marriage under Albanian customary law as opposed to out of vengeance for a violation of honour caused by a prior act. This difference is relevant because it pertains to human rights.
[51]
The importance of human rights was described in
Ward
above. The Supreme Court first recognized that "any association bound by some common thread" is not necessarily included in the scope of "particular social group" (see
Ward
above, at paragraph 61). Rather, the meaning of this term "should take into account the general underlying themes of the defence of human rights and anti-discrimination that form the basis for the international refugee protection initiative" (see
Ward
above, at paragraph 70).
[52]
The applicants in this case highlight provisions in international human rights instruments in support of their claim that the right to marry freely is a basic human right:
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights
Article 16:
(1) Men and women of full age, without any limitation due to race, nationality or religion, have the right to marry and to found a family. They are entitled to equal rights as to marriage, during marriage and at its dissolution.
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
Article 10:
The States Parties to the present Covenant recognize that:
1. The widest possible protection and assistance should be accorded to the family, which is the natural and fundamental group unit of society, particularly for its establishment and while it is responsible for the care and education of dependent children. Marriage must be entered into with the free consent of the intending spouses.
[53]
This reference to international instruments is relevant as the Supreme Court has recognized the importance of international sources in determining the meaning of "particular social group" (see
Ward
above, at paragraph 55).
[54]
I do not agree with the respondent that this case pertains to revenge killings as in other blood feud cases. The facts in this case are not based purely on criminality, revenge or personal vendetta (see <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> above, at paragraph 40). Rather, the persecution arises from a refusal to abide to customary Albanian law that limits the internationally recognized right to marry freely. As such, I find that the applicants fall within the scope of the "particular social group" category described by the Supreme Court as "groups defined by an innate or unchangeable characteristic", and to a lesser extent also the category of "groups whose members voluntarily associate for reasons so fundamental to their human dignity that they should not be forced to forsake the association" (see
Ward
above, at paragraph 70). Further, unlike the applicant in
Ward
above, whose fear arose due to his actions, the fear of persecution faced by the applicants in this case arose specifically due to their association in a social group of individuals that marry contrary to the Karun (see
Ward
above, at paragraph 79).
[55]
Recognizing the deference owed to decision makers on this issue, I nevertheless find that the Board's decision was unreasonable. Based on the evidence before it, the finding that a nexus with a Convention ground was not established was not a conclusion that fell within the range of acceptable outcomes.
Issue 3
Did the Board err in determining that state protection was available to the applicants in Albania?
[56]
The Board found that the applicants had failed to establish that it was not objectively reasonable for them to seek protection from the authorities. It highlighted the fact that the applicants had not reported any of the three attacks to the police. The Board then cited various country conditions documents and acknowledged that the evidence was conflicting on the adequacy of state protection for blood feud victims. However, relying on an incident reported in a 2008 document, the Board found that the Albanian state had the capacity and will to effectively implement the legislative and procedural framework.
[57]
The problem with the Board's analysis is that it fails to consider the applicants' repeated attempts to seek help from a peace and reconciliation commission that was set up to resolve blood feuds in Albania. This is particularly important in light of the established law that the availability of state protection must be assessed on a case-by-case basis (see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2010] FCJ No 132 at paragraph 33). This failure is exacerbated by recent documentary evidence that speaks to the lack of protection that the Albanian state and police provide to families involved in blood feuds. According to this documentation, "the Albanian police often do not get involved in blood-feud disputes until a crime has taken place". The example highlighted by the Board supports this position, namely, that the police did not become involved until after the crime was committed. Collectively, this raises serious concerns about the state protection available to the applicants in Albania prior to any harm being caused to them.
[58]
Therefore, again recognizing the deference owed to the Board on this issue, I nevertheless find that it came to a conclusion that was not transparent, justifiable and intelligible based on the evidence before it.
Issue 4
Did the Board err in its determination on credibility?
[59]
It is well established that credibility findings demand a high level of judicial deference and should only be overturned in the clearest of cases (see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2011] FCJ No 1633 at paragraph 30). The Court will generally not substitute its opinion unless it finds that the decision was based on erroneous findings of fact made in either a perverse or capricious manner or without regard for the material before it (see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2004] FCJ No 1869 at paragraph 3). Findings must also be supported by reasons written in "clear and unmistakable terms" (see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). In reviewing a board's decision, isolated sections should not be scrutinized; rather, the Court must consider whether the decision as a whole supports a board's negative credibility finding (see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2010] FCJ No 1365 at paragraph 30). Although the applicants did not appear to address the issue of credibility in their written submissions, applicants' counsel did deal with the matter in his reply comments which were in response to the respondent's oral and written submissions on credibility.
[60]
In its decision, the Board relied on the following points in finding that the applicants did not provide credible evidence to support central allegations of their claims:
1. After the blood feud was declared, the principal applicant returned to work rather than remaining in self-confinement;
2. The principal applicant's reason for returning to work (to provide for his family) was nonsensical given his parents were available to attend at the bar; and
3. The two men who accosted the principal applicant at work did not physically harm him on the way to or from the bar after the altercation.
[61]
These findings ignore other relevant aspects of the applicants' submissions. For example, the principal applicant testified that although he returned to work after the couple's marriage, he was accosted only two days later at the bar. He had initially believed that his wife's family would not harm them once they were married, but this incident led him to reconsider the threat and thereafter enter self-confinement. The principal applicant also testified that when the incident occurred, customers who knew him came to assist him:
Everybody was involved to see what is going on and possibly help me and these were the people that actually sent me home right away. Because they could see that I was not safe.
[62]
After this testimony, there was a break in the hearing. On return, this incident was not discussed further with the principal applicant. As such, the Board's reliance on the lack of post-incident harm, events on which it did not question the principal applicant at the hearing, is a questionable basis for its credibility finding.
[63]
Therefore, although this Court must show significant deference to the Board's credibility findings, I do not find that there was sufficient basis in this case on which the Board could reasonably question the applicants' credibility. The hearing transcript highlights the communication difficulties at the hearing; difficulties that were exacerbated by the fact that the interpreter and the applicants spoke different dialects and the interpreter required instructions halfway through the hearing.
[64]
In summary, I find that the Board's decision on the issues of nexus to a Convention ground, state protection and credibility were not reasonable. The Board's conclusions on all these issues were not justifiable, intelligible or within the range of acceptable outcomes based on the evidence before it. I would therefore allow this judicial review application, set aside the decision of the Board and refer the matter to a differently constituted panel of the Board for redetermination.
[65]
The applicants only wished to submit a proposed serious question of general importance if I had interpreted the decision in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> above in a way different than I have. The respondent did not wish to submit a proposed question of general importance and did not believe a question should be certified for the applicants.
JUDGMENT
[66]
THIS COURT'S JUDGMENT is that
:
1. The application for judicial review is allowed, the decision of the Board is set aside and the matter is referred to a different panel of the Board for redetermination.
2. No serious question of general importance is certified.
ANNEX
Relevant Statutory Provisions
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act
, SC 2001, c 27
72. (1) Judicial review by the Federal Court with respect to any matter - a decision, determination or order made, a measure taken or a question raised - under this Act is commenced by making an application for leave to the Court.
96. A Convention refugee is a person who, by reason of a well-founded fear of persecution for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group or political opinion,
(a) is outside each of their countries of nationality and is unable or, by reason of that fear, unwilling to avail themself of the protection of each of those countries; or
(b) not having a country of nationality, is outside the country of their former habitual residence and is unable or, by reason of that fear, unwilling to return to that country.
97. (1) A person in need of protection is a person in Canada whose removal to their country or countries of nationality or, if they do not have a country of nationality, their country of former habitual residence, would subject them personally
(a) to a danger, believed on substantial grounds to exist, of torture within the meaning of Article 1 of the Convention Against Torture; or
(b) to a risk to their life or to a risk of cruel and unusual treatment or punishment if
(i) the person is unable or, because of that risk, unwilling to avail themself of the protection of that country,
(ii) the risk would be faced by the person in every part of that country and is not faced generally by other individuals in or from that country,
(iii) the risk is not inherent or incidental to lawful sanctions, unless imposed in disregard of accepted international standards, and
(iv) the risk is not caused by the inability of that country to provide adequate health or medical care.
72. (1) Le contrôle judiciaire par la Cour fédérale de toute mesure - décision, ordonnance, question ou affaire - prise dans le cadre de la présente loi est subordonné au dépôt d'une demande d'autorisation.
96. A qualité de réfugié au sens de la Convention - le réfugié - la personne qui, craignant avec raison d'être persécutée du fait de sa race, de sa religion, de sa nationalité, de son appartenance à un groupe social ou de ses opinions politiques:
a) soit se trouve hors de tout pays dont elle a la nationalité et ne peut ou, du fait de cette crainte, ne veut se réclamer de la protection de chacun de ces pays;
b) soit, si elle n'a pas de nationalité et se trouve hors du pays dans lequel elle avait sa résidence habituelle, ne peut ni, du fait de cette crainte, ne veut y retourner.
97. (1) A qualité de personne à protéger la personne qui se trouve au Canada et serait personnellement, par son renvoi vers tout pays dont elle a la nationalité ou, si elle n'a pas de nationalité, dans lequel elle avait sa résidence habituelle, exposée:
a) soit au risque, s'il y a des motifs sérieux de le croire, d'être soumise à la torture au sens de l'article premier de la Convention contre la torture;
b) soit à une menace à sa vie ou au risque de traitements ou peines cruels et inusités dans le cas suivant:
(i) elle ne peut ou, de ce fait, ne veut se réclamer de la protection de ce pays,
(ii) elle y est exposée en tout lieu de ce pays alors que d'autres personnes originaires de ce pays ou qui s'y trouvent ne le sont généralement pas,
(iii) la menace ou le risque ne résulte pas de sanctions légitimes - sauf celles infligées au mépris des normes internationales - et inhérents à celles-ci ou occasionnés par elles,
(iv) la menace ou le risque ne résulte pas de l'incapacité du pays de fournir des soins médicaux ou de santé adéquats.
.........................
Zamir Shkabari, Antiana Shkabari,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Cour est saisie d'une demande de contrôle judiciaire, présentée conformément au paragraphe 72(1) de la
Loi sur l'immigration et la protection des réfugiés,
LC 2001, ch. 27 (la Loi), de la décision datée du 9 juin 2011 par laquelle la Section de la protection des réfugiés de la Commission de l'immigration et du statut de réfugié (la Commission) a conclu que les demandeurs n'étaient ni des réfugiés au sens de la Convention visés à l'article 96 de la Loi ni des personnes à protéger au sens du paragraphe 97(1) de la Loi.
[2]
Cette décision reposait sur la conclusion de la Commission selon laquelle il n'existait pas de lien entre la crainte des demandeurs qui était suscitée par une vendetta et la définition de réfugié selon la Convention. De plus, selon la Commission, les demandeurs n'avaient présenté aucune preuve crédible à l'appui des allégations centrales de leur revendication et aucune preuve claire et convaincante de l'incapacité de l'État à protéger ses citoyens.
[3]
Les demandeurs prient la Cour d'annuler la décision de la Commission et de renvoyer l'affaire pour qu'il soit procédé une nouvelle audience.
Le contexte
[4]
Le principal demandeur est Zamir Shkabari. Il a les liens de parenté suivants avec les autres demandeurs: Antiana Shkabari est son épouse, et Ray Shkabari et Ergi Shkabari, ses fils mineurs.
[5]
Tous les demandeurs sont des citoyens de l'Albanie, sauf Ray Shkabari, qui est né aux États-Unis et est un citoyen de ce pays.
[6]
Le demandeur principal et son épouse se sont mariés en novembre 1998. Après leur mariage, ils ont découvert qu'ils étaient des cousins éloignés (cinquième génération). Les parents du demandeur principal ont accepté le mariage. Cependant, Fiqri Mati, le père d'Antiana, a soutenu que le mariage a jeté honte et déshonneur sur sa famille, car il contrevenait au droit Kanun (le droit coutumier des Albanais), qui interdit le mariage entre cousins appartenant à une même lignée. Le mariage allait également à l'encontre de la prérogative patriarcale de Fiqri Mati de choisir l'époux de sa fille.
[7]
Le père du demandeur principal a contacté des anciens (des personnes versées en droit Kanun), des représentants du groupe de réconciliation et des personnes du gouvernement local pour qu'ils l'aident à résoudre le conflit. Cependant, Fiqri Mati a refusé de les rencontrer. Il a répudié sa fille et a déclaré une vendetta contre elle et le demandeur principal.
[8]
Une semaine après le mariage du couple, le demandeur principal est retourné travailler au petit bar de sa famille. Cela allait à l'encontre des mesures généralement prises par les personnes ciblées par une vendetta pour se cacher, mais son emploi au bar constituait son seul moyen de pourvoir aux besoins de sa famille.
[9]
Vers la fin de novembre 1998, au deuxième jour du retour du demandeur principal au travail après son mariage, deux parents de Fiqri Mati sont venus au bar et ont refusé de payer ce qu'ils avaient commandé. Lorsque le demandeur principal les a confrontés, ils l'ont assailli et l'ont frappé au visage. Les hommes l'ont également menacé, en déclarant qu'ils lui feraient payer ce qu'il leur devait. Après cette agression, le père du demandeur principal a consulté des anciens et a offert de payer une somme d'argent à Fiqri Mati en compensation. Fiqri Mati a refusé cette offre. Le demandeur principal s'est alors tenu caché.
[10]
En mars 1999, le demandeur principal, accompagné de sa mère, a essayé de rendre visite à sa tante. Alors qu'ils se trouvaient dehors, une voiture de police sans plaques d'immatriculation s'est arrêtée devant eux et deux hommes, qu'il croyait être des cousins d'Antiana, ont tenté d'enlever le demandeur principal. Lorsque sa mère s'est portée à son secours, les assaillants l'ont laissé partir par crainte d'être déshonorés en touchant à une femme. Selon le droit Kanun, les vengeurs ne peuvent pas frapper un homme qui est en compagnie d'une femme.
[11]
Plus tard le même mois, le père du demandeur principal a demandé aux représentants du groupe de réconciliation de tenter de nouveau de parler à Fiqri Mati. Encore une fois, celui-ci a refusé leurs offres. Le demandeur principal et son épouse se sont par conséquent cachés chez la marraine du demandeur dans la ville de Tirana en mars 1999. Cependant, ils ont continué à vivre dans la crainte et ils ont éprouvé là-bas des difficultés financières. Par conséquent, en avril 2000, peu après qu'Antiana eut donné naissance à leur premier fils, le couple est retourné dans la maison familiale du demandeur principal dans la ville de Shkoder.
[12]
En septembre 2000, deux hommes masqués ont confronté le demandeur principal alors qu'il se rendait à la pharmacie pour y prendre des médicaments pour son fils malade. Ils l'ont frappé et il a perdu connaissance. Il s'est réveillé plus tard à l'hôpital. Le demandeur principal croyait que les deux hommes masqués étaient des parents de son épouse.
[13]
Les demandeurs n'ont pas rapporté ces trois agressions à la police.
[14]
Par la suite, le père du demandeur principal a décidé que le couple et son enfant devaient quitter l'Albanie. Il a vendu le bar familial pour rassembler les fonds nécessaires. Le demandeur principal a retenu les services d'un passeur qui a aidé la famille à fuir aux États-Unis.
[15]
Les demandeurs se sont enfuis aux États-Unis en octobre 2000. Ils y ont présenté des demandes d'asile fondées sur des raisons politiques. Leurs demandes ont été finalement rejetées en 2008. Craignant pour leurs vies, les demandeurs sont venus au Canada le 23 novembre 2008 et ont revendiqué l'asile.
[16]
L'audience relative aux revendications des demandeurs a eu lieu le 21 mars 2011.
La décision de la Commission
[17]
La Commission a rendu sa décision le 9 juin 2011. Dans sa décision, la Commission a conclu que les demandeurs n'étaient ni des réfugiés au sens de la Convention, ni des personnes à protéger.
[18]
La Commission a d'abord noté que les identités des demandeurs avaient été établies sur la foi de leurs passeports et de leurs actes de naissance.
[19]
La Commission a ensuite renvoyé à un certain nombre de cas et a conclu qu'il n'existait pas de lien entre la crainte des demandeurs suscitée par la vendetta et la définition de réfugié au sens de la Convention, car les victimes d'actes criminels, y compris les victimes de vendettas, ne satisfont pas au critère du lien nécessaire.
[20]
La Commission a également conclu que les demandeurs n'avaient pas présenté une preuve crédible à l'appui des allégations centrales de leur revendication. La Commission a fait état du témoignage du demandeur principal selon lequel il ne s'était pas tenu caché après la déclaration de la vendetta même si c'est ce que les membres masculins de la famille faisaient généralement lorsqu'une vendetta était déclarée contre eux. Ce fait était exacerbé par la conclusion de la Commission que ses parents auraient pu exploiter le bar pour éviter que le demandeur principal coure un risque en le faisant. De plus, la Commission a noté que rien ne prouvait que les deux hommes qui l'avaient abordé au bar l'avaient blessé après l'altercation. Pour cette raison, la Commission a conclu que les actions du demandeur principal après la déclaration de la vendetta ne concordaient pas avec son témoignage sur les risques auxquels il était exposé.
[21]
En ce qui concerne la question de la protection de l'État, la Commission a conclu que les demandeurs n'avaient pas présenté une preuve claire et convaincante de l'incapacité de l'État à protéger ses citoyens. La Commission a souligné le défaut du demandeur principal de rapporter à la police les agressions commises en novembre 1998, mars 1999 et septembre 2000.
[22]
La Commission a fait état de la documentation contradictoire sur le caractère adéquat de la protection de l'État en Albanie pour les victimes de vendetta. Cependant, la Commission a accordé une grande importance au rapport de mai 2008 sur les vendettas en Albanie, qui faisait état de la déclaration de culpabilité de membres d'une famille albanaise qui s'étaient rendus au Royaume-Uni pour exécuter une vendetta. La Commission a conclu que ce cas constituait un exemple clair d'une cour criminelle qui fonctionne, que l'on ne laissait pas courir les tueurs qui exécutent des vendettas et qu'on ne leur infligeait pas des peines légères, qu'une législation efficace et un cadre procédural existaient, et que l'État avait la capacité et la volonté de mettre en œuvre ce cadre. Pour cette raison, la Commission a estimé qu'elle ne disposait pas de suffisamment d'éléments de preuve pour lui permettre de croire que l'État ne déploierait des efforts sérieux et raisonnables pour protéger le demandeur principal, au besoin.
[23]
La Commission a également indiqué que l'Albanie était une démocratie parlementaire qui fonctionne et sa constitution prévoit un système judiciaire indépendant. Rien dans la preuve dont la Commission disposait n'indiquait que l'Albanie se trouve dans un état d'effondrement complet. La Commission a conclu que le demandeur principal n'avait pas démontré qu'il était objectivement raisonnable qu'il ne sollicite pas la protection des autorités. Il n'était pas suffisant que le demandeur principal ne sollicite pas la protection simplement parce qu'il ne croyait pas qu'elle était disponible.
[24]
Étant donné sa conclusion quant à la crédibilité et sa conclusion selon laquelle les demandeurs n'avaient pas réfuté la présomption de la protection de l'État, la Commission a conclu que les demandeurs ne s'exposeraient pas à une menace à leur vie ou au risque de traitements ou peines cruels et inusités s'ils retournaient en Albanie. Aucune preuve n'a été présentée quant au risque d'être soumis à la torture. Pour ces motifs, la Commission a rejeté les demandes d'asile des demandeurs.
Les questions litigieuses
[25]
Les demandeurs présentent les points litigieux suivants:
1. La Commission a-t-elle commis une erreur en concluant qu'il n'existait aucun lien entre les demandes d'asile des demandeurs et un motif prévu par la Convention?
2. La Commission a-t-elle commis une erreur en concluant que les demandeurs d'asile pouvaient se prévaloir de la protection de l'État?
3. La Commission a-t-elle fait défaut d'examiner des éléments de preuve importants dans les demandes d'asile des demandeurs?
[26]
Je formulerais les questions comme suit:
1. Quelle est la norme de contrôle applicable?
2. La Commission a-t-elle commis une erreur en concluant qu'il n'existait pas de lien avec un motif prévu par la Convention?
3. La Commission a-t-elle commis une erreur en concluant que les demandeurs pouvaient se prévaloir de la protection de l'État en Albanie?
4. La conclusion de la Commission sur la crédibilité était-elle erronée?
Les observations écrites des demandeurs
[27]
Les demandeurs font valoir que la Commission a commis une erreur en concluant qu'il n'existait pas de lien entre leurs demandes d'asile et un motif prévu par la Convention. En particulier, la Commission a commis une erreur en n'appréciant pas la nature singulière des demandes d'asile des demandeurs, soit le fait que ces demandes reposaient sur une vendetta résultant de l'interdiction de leur mariage en vertu du droit coutumier albanais plutôt que d'une vengeance pour une atteinte à l'honneur. En étudiant les demandes des demandeurs comme si elles avaient trait à une vendetta reposant sur une vengeance, la Commission a mal interprété l'élément central des revendications des demandeurs et commis une erreur.
[28]
Les demandeurs font valoir qu'ils risquent la persécution du fait qu'ils appartiennent à un groupe social particulier de personnes dont le mariage est interdit en vertu du droit coutumier albanais. Le droit de se marier librement est prévu dans plusieurs instruments internationaux sur les droits de la personne. La raison sous-jacente de la vendetta les visant n'a rien à voir avec les actes de violence réciproques qui ont antérieurement amené les tribunaux à considérer les actes commis dans le contexte de vendettas comme des actes de vengeance.
[29]
À l'appui de leurs prétentions, les demandeurs font référence au processus en deux étapes énoncé dans
Canada (Procureur général) c Ward
, [1993] 2 RCS 689, [1993] ACS no 74, pour déterminer si la persécution découle de l'appartenance à un groupe social en particulier. La première étape consiste à déterminer si une question ayant trait aux droits de la personne ou à la discrimination est soulevée. Les demandeurs soutiennent qu'il a été satisfait à cette première étape en l'espèce parce que le droit de choisir librement son partenaire et celui de constituer une famille sont des droits fondamentaux de la personne formulés dans des instruments internationaux. La deuxième étape requiert de déterminer si la persécution résulte de l'appartenance au groupe social particulier en cause. Les demandeurs soutiennent qu'ils sont ciblés en raison de leur mariage et de la constitution d'une famille contrairement au droit Kanun. C'est par conséquent leur appartenance au groupe social particulier des couples mariés qui est la cause de leur persécution.
[30]
Les demandeurs soutiennent qu'ils ont présenté des faits et des observations écrites qui distinguent explicitement leur cas de celui plus général des vendettas albanaises dans lesquelles des meurtres sont perpétrés par vengeance. Cependant, la Commission n'en a pas tenu compte et a simplement appliqué le raisonnement habituellement appliqué aux vendettas sans considérer les faits distinctifs présentés par les demandeurs.
[31]
Les demandeurs font valoir dans leur mémoire complémentaire que la Commission a commis une erreur en n'examinant pas dans ses motifs la preuve pertinente présentée après l'audience sur des questions qui, selon la Commission, constituaient les points cruciaux des revendications des demandeurs. Ces questions concernaient le bien-fondé de la crainte des demandeurs d'être persécutés en Albanie et la crédibilité générale du demandeur principal.
[32]
Enfin, les demandeurs affirment que la Commission a commis une erreur en concluant qu'ils pouvaient se prévaloir de la protection de l'État en Albanie. Les demandeurs soutiennent que la Commission a examiné, de manière sélective, seulement deux documents sur la situation dans le pays et qu'elle n'a pas tenu compte d'autres documents contenus dans les observations des demandeurs ainsi que dans le cartable national de documentation sur l'Albanie. La Commission n'a pas non plus traité des arguments précis sur la question soulevée dans les observations des demandeurs. Par exemple, la Commission n'a pas tenu compte de la preuve présentée par les demandeurs sur leurs efforts infructueux en vue d'obtenir de l'aide par l'intermédiaire d'une commission de réconciliation et de paix mise sur pied pour résoudre les vendettas en Albanie. Les demandeurs font valoir que, dans un certain nombre d'affaires soumises à la Cour, la preuve sur l'existence et l'intervention des commissions de paix et de conciliation a été jugée cruciale pour trancher ces affaires de manière appropriée.
Les observations écrites du défendeur
[33]
Le défendeur fait valoir que la Commission a conclu à bon droit qu'il n'existe pas de lien entre les vendettas et la définition prévue par la Convention. Il est de jurisprudence constante que les personnes impliquées dans des vendettas ne sont pas considérées comme des membres d'un groupe social en particulier.
[34]
Le défendeur soutient que l'argument des demandeurs sur la nature de leur revendication, soit une vendetta résultant d'une opposition à leur mariage en vertu du droit coutumier albanais plutôt que d'une vengeance pour atteinte à l'honneur, est sans fondement. Il est question dans les deux cas de meurtres perpétrés par vengeance, et les personnes visées n'appartiennent pas à un groupe social en particulier aux fins de la Convention.
[35]
De plus, le défendeur affirme que la Commission n'a pas omis d'examiner les observations présentées après l'audience ou la preuve sur la question du lien. Il convient de noter que la Commission a en fait demandé la documentation sur l'interdiction des mariages entre cousins éloignés en vertu du droit Kanun. Ayant explicitement déclaré qu'elle avait examiné les observations écrites sur ce point, la Commission a conclu que le fait qu'une famille soit visée par une vendetta ne fait pas naître un droit à présenter une demande en vertu de l'article 96 de la Loi. La Commission n'a pas commis d'erreur en parvenant à cette conclusion.
[36]
Le défendeur fait également valoir que la Commission a conclu de façon raisonnable que les demandeurs n'avaient pas présenté une preuve crédible pour étayer les allégations centrales de leur revendication. Le défendeur fait remarquer que les membres masculins d'une famille sont exposés à un risque lorsqu'une vendetta est déclarée contre la famille. Cependant, en l'espèce, la vendetta visait le demandeur principal et son épouse. De plus, comme la Commission l'a noté, les actions du demandeur principal lorsqu'il est retourné au travail après la déclaration de la vendetta contredisaient le risque qu'il prétendait courir. De plus, les conclusions sur la crédibilité tirées par la Commission doivent être vraies puisque les demandeurs ne les contestent pas. Ces seules conclusions suffisent à rejeter les revendications des demandeurs.
[37]
Le défendeur fait valoir que les demandeurs n'ont pas présenté des éléments de preuve clairs et convaincants de l'incapacité de l'État à protéger ses citoyens. En ne procédant pas à toutes les démarches raisonnables pour obtenir la protection de l'État, comme le démontre le fait qu'ils ne se soient pas adressés à la police, les demandeurs ont fait défaut de réfuter la présomption de la protection de l'État.
[38]
Enfin, le défendeur soutient que la Commission n'a pas examiné la preuve de manière sélective, mais qu'elle a plutôt reconnu la preuve contradictoire. Le défendeur fait valoir que les arguments des demandeurs ont trait principalement à l'appréciation de la preuve par la Commission. La Cour ne doit pas intervenir sauf s'il y a des erreurs lourdes ou des conclusions de fait tirées de façon perverse. Le défendeur soutient que les demandeurs n'ont fait ressortir aucune preuve cohérente à l'appui de leur prétention selon laquelle la Commission a commis une erreur en rendant sa décision sur la protection de l'État.
[39]
En résumé, le défendeur affirme que la Commission a apprécié la preuve de manière raisonnable et qu'elle est parvenue à une conclusion raisonnable.
Analyse et décision
Question 1
Quelle est la norme de contrôle applicable?
[40]
Lorsque la norme de contrôle applicable à une question particulière soumise à la cour est déjà établie dans la jurisprudence, la cour de révision peut adopter la norme (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , au paragraphe 57).
[41]
Il est établi en droit que les conclusions sur l'existence d'un lien avec un motif prévu par la Convention visé à l'article 96 de la Loi sont des questions mixtes de fait et de droit susceptibles de révision selon la norme de la décision raisonnable (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2011] ACF no 968, au paragraphe 15, et
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2009] ACF no 1300 (QL), au paragraphe 27).
[42]
Il est également de jurisprudence constante que les conclusions relatives à la crédibilité, qui sont décrites comme constituant « l'essentiel de la compétence de la Commission », sont dans leur fond des conclusions de fait pures susceptibles de révision selon la norme de la décision raisonnable (
Canada (Ministre de la Citoyenneté et de l' <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2009] ACS no 12, au paragraphe 46;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2011] ACF no 786, au paragraphe 23, et
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2003] ACF no 162, au paragraphe 7).
[43]
Enfin, l'analyse des conclusions sur la protection de l'État et l'interprétation de la preuve soulèvent des questions mixtes de fait et de droit qui sont également susceptibles de révision selon la norme de la décision raisonnable (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2007] ACF no 584, au paragraphe 38;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2010] ACF no 650, au paragraphe 16).
[44]
Lorsqu'elle procède au contrôle de la décision de la Commission selon la norme de la décision raisonnable, la Cour ne doit intervenir que si la Commission est parvenue à une conclusion qui n'est pas transparente, justifiable et intelligible et qui n'appartient pas aux issues acceptables fondées sur la preuve dont la Commission disposait (arrêts <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ,au paragraphe 47, et <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , au paragraphe 59, précités). Comme la Cour suprême l'a déclaré dans l'arrêt <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précité, « la cour de révision ne peut [...] substituer [à la solution retenue] l'issue qui serait à son avis préférable » et « il n'entre pas dans les attributions de la cour de révision de soupeser à nouveau les éléments de preuve » (au paragraphe 59).
Question 2
La Commission a-t-elle commis une erreur en concluant qu'il n'existait pas de lien avec un motif prévu par la Convention?
[45]
La première exigence pour être considéré comme un réfugié au sens de la Convention visé à l'article 96 de la Loi est l'établissement d'un lien avec l'un des cinq motifs de demande d'asile mentionnés dans la Convention. En l'espèce, les demandeurs font valoir que leur appartenance à un groupe social particulier démontre l'existence du lien requis avec un motif prévu par la Convention. Les demandeurs définissent ce groupe social comme comprenant les individus à qui il est interdit de se marier librement en vertu du droit couturier albanais (le Kanun).
[46]
La Commission a conclu que la crainte des demandeurs découlait d'une vendetta. À ce titre, ils sont des victimes de criminalité, ce qui, selon la Commission, ne démontrait pas l'existence d'un lien avec la définition de réfugié prévue dans la Convention. À l'appui de cette conclusion, la Commission a mentionné la décision
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2003] ACF no 812.
[47]
Dans l'affaire <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ,précitée, les demanderesses étaient également des citoyennes albanaises qui revendiquaient l'asile sur le fondement du risque auquel elles étaient exposées en raison d'une vendetta entre deux familles. La famille Zefi exerçait des pressions sur la demanderesse principale pour qu'elle venge la mort de son mari. En même temps, si la mort de son mari n'était pas vengée, les membres de la famille Frani avaient le droit en vertu du droit Kanun de tuer un autre membre de la famille Zefi. Comme dans la présente affaire, les demanderesses ont déposé des demandes d'asile fondées sur l'appartenance à un groupe social en particulier. Cependant, dans l'affaire <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précitée, le groupe social en particulier était défini en termes larges comme une famille ou un clan impliqué dans une vendetta.
[48]
Le juge François Lemieux a expliqué que la première étape dans l'analyse de la question de savoir si un revendicateur du statut de réfugié pouvait être considéré comme appartenant à un groupe social en particulier consistait à déterminer si des droits de la personne fondamentaux sont en cause (décision <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précitée, au paragraphe 36). Deuxièmement, l'appartenance à ce groupe social en particulier doit être la cause qui fait craindre avec raison au demandeur d'être persécuté (décision <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précitée, au paragraphe 39). Au paragraphe 41, la Cour a conclu que:
Le meurtre perpétré dans le cadre d'une vendetta n'a rien à voir avec la défense des droits de la personne. Il constitue, au contraire, une violation des droits de la personne. Les familles mêlées à ces vendettas ne forment pas un groupe social au sens de la Convention. La reconnaissance de l'appartenance à un groupe social pour une raison pareille entraînerait la conséquence singulière d'accorder un statut à une activité criminelle ou d'accorder un statut en raison de ce que fait une personne plutôt que de ce qu'elle est (voir
Ward
, par. 69).
[49]
Sur ce fondement, la Commission dans l'affaire <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précitée, a rejeté la demande de statut de réfugiées au sens de la Convention présentée par les demanderesses.
[50]
Dans la présente espèce, les demandeurs critiquent la conclusion de la Commission au motif que la nature de leur revendication diffère de celle de l'affaire <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précitée, et d'autres affaires ayant trait à des vendettas en Albanie. Contrairement à ces affaires, la vendetta dans la présente espèce découlait directement de l'interdiction de leur mariage en vertu du droit coutumier albanais plutôt que d'une vengeance pour une atteinte à l'honneur causée par un acte antérieur. Cette différence est pertinente parce qu'elle touche aux droits de la personne.
[51]
L'importance des droits de la personne a été mise en lumière dans l'arrêt
Ward
, précité. La Cour suprême a d'abord reconnu que « toute association ayant certains points en commun » n'est pas nécessairement incluse dans l'expression un « certain groupe social » (arrêt
Ward
, précité, au paragraphe 61). Le sens donné à cette expression « devrait [plutôt] tenir compte des thèmes sous-jacents généraux de la défense des droits de la personne et de la lutte contre la discrimination qui viennent justifier l'initiative internationale de protection des réfugiés » (arrêt
Ward
, précité, au paragraphe 70).
[52]
Dans la présente espèce, les demandeurs invoquent certaines dispositions d'instruments internationaux sur les droits de la personne à l'appui de leur prétention selon laquelle le droit de se marier librement constitue un droit fondamental de la personne:
La déclaration universelle des droits de l'homme
Article 16:
1. À partir de l'âge nubile, l'homme et la femme, sans aucune restriction quant à la race, la nationalité ou la religion, ont le droit de se marier et de fonder une famille. Ils ont des droits égaux au regard du mariage, durant le mariage et lors de sa dissolution.
Pacte international relatif aux droits économiques, sociaux et culturels
Article 10:
Les États parties au présent Pacte reconnaissent que:
1. Une protection et une assistance aussi larges que possible doivent être accordées à la famille, qui est l'élément naturel et fondamental de la société, en particulier pour sa formation et aussi longtemps qu'elle a la responsabilité de l'entretien et de l'éducation d'enfants à charge. Le mariage doit être librement consenti par les futurs époux.
[53]
Ce renvoi à des instruments internationaux est pertinent puisque la Cour suprême a reconnu l'importance des sources internationales pour déterminer la signification de « groupe social » (arrêt
Ward
, précité, au paragraphe 55).
[54]
Je ne suis pas d'accord avec le défendeur que la présente affaire a trait à des meurtres perpétrés par vengeance comme dans les autres cas de vendettas. Les faits de l'espèce ne reposent pas seulement sur la criminalité, la vengeance ou une vendetta personnelle (décision <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précitée, au paragraphe 40). La persécution découle plutôt du refus de se conformer au droit coutumier albanais qui limite le droit internationalement reconnu de se marier librement. À ce titre, j'estime que les demandeurs appartiennent à la catégorie du « groupe social » décrite par la Cour suprême comme « les groupes définis par une caractéristique innée ou immuable » et, dans une moindre mesure, également à la catégorie des « groupes dont les membres s'associent volontairement pour des raisons si essentielles à leur dignité humaine qu'ils ne devraient pas être contraints à renoncer à cette association » (arrêt
Ward
, précité, au paragraphe 70). De plus, contrairement à l'appelant dans l'arrêt
Ward
,précité, dont la crainte était due à ses actions, la crainte de persécution à laquelle les demandeurs sont exposés dans la présente espèce découlait expressément de leur association à un groupe social d'individus qui se marient en contravention au Karun (arrêt
Ward
, précité, au paragraphe 79).
[55]
Je reconnais qu'il convient de faire preuve de déférence envers les décideurs à cet égard, mais j'estime néanmoins que la décision de la Commission était déraisonnable. Sur le fondement de la preuve dont la Commission disposait, la conclusion que l'existence d'un lien avec un motif prévu par la Convention n'avait pas été établie n'était pas une conclusion qui appartenait aux issues acceptables.
Question 3
La Commission a-t-elle commis une erreur en concluant que les demandeurs pouvaient se prévaloir de la protection de l'État en Albanie?
[56]
La Commission a conclu que les demandeurs n'avaient pas démontré qu'il n'était pas objectivement raisonnable qu'ils sollicitent la protection des autorités. Elle a souligné le fait que les demandeurs n'avaient rapporté aucune des trois agressions à la police. La Commission a ensuite cité divers documents sur la situation dans le pays et a reconnu que la preuve sur le caractère suffisant de la protection de l'État pour les victimes de vendettas était contradictoire. Cependant, s'appuyant sur un incident rapporté dans un document de 2008, la Commission a conclu que l'État albanais avait la capacité et la volonté de mettre en œuvre le cadre législatif et procédural d'une manière efficace.
[57]
Le problème dans l'analyse de la Commission est que celle-ci n'a pas considéré les tentatives répétées des demandeurs pour obtenir l'aide d'une commission sur la paix et la réconciliation qui avait été mise sur pied pour résoudre les vendettas en Albanie. Cela est particulièrement important à la lumière du droit établi selon lequel la disponibilité de la protection de l'État doit être évaluée au cas par cas (voir
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2010] ACF no 132, au paragraphe 33). Cette omission est d'autant plus grave que la preuve documentaire récente traite de l'insuffisance de la protection que l'État albanais et la police accordent aux familles impliquées dans des vendettas. Selon cette preuve documentaire, [traduction] « la police albanaise ne se mêle pas des querelles liées à des vendettas avant qu'un crime ne soit commis ». L'exemple souligné par la Commission étaye cette thèse, soit que la police n'est intervenue qu'après la perpétration du crime. Tout cela soulève des inquiétudes sérieuses quant à la protection de l'État dont peuvent se prévaloir les demandeurs en Albanie avant qu'un préjudice quelconque ne leur soit causé.
[58]
Par conséquent, quoique je reconnaisse que je dois faire déférence envers la Commission à cet égard, je conclus néanmoins que la Commission est parvenue à une conclusion qui n'est pas transparente, justifiable et intelligible compte tenu de la preuve dont elle disposait.
Question 4
La conclusion de la Commission sur la crédibilité était-elle erronée?
[59]
Il est bien établi que les conclusions sur la crédibilité appellent un haut niveau de déférence et qu'il ne convient de les infirmer que dans les cas les plus clairs (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2011] ACF no 1633, au paragraphe 30). La Cour ne substitute généralement pas son opinion à celle de la Commission sauf si elle estime que la décision reposait sur des conclusions de fait erronées tirées de façon abusive ou arbitraire ou sans tenir compte des éléments dont elle disposait (voir
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2004] ACF no 1869, au paragraphe 3). Les conclusions doivent également être étayées par des motifs rédigés « en termes clairs et explicites » (voir
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). Lorsqu'une décision de la Commission fait l'objet d'un contrôle, il ne faut pas examiner les sections de cette décision isolément; la Cour doit plutôt se demander si la décision dans son ensemble étaye la conclusion défavorable de la Commission sur la crédibilité (voir
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2010] ACF no 1365, au paragraphe 30). Les demandeurs ne semblent pas avoir soulevé la question de la crédibilité dans leurs observations écrites, mais leur avocat en a traité dans sa réponse aux observations écrites et orales du défendeur sur la crédibilité.
[60]
Dans sa décision, la Commission s'est appuyée sur les points suivants pour conclure que les demandeurs n'avaient pas présenté des éléments de preuve crédibles à l'appui des principales allégations de leurs demandes:
1. Après la déclaration de la vendetta, le demandeur principal est retourné travailler plutôt que de se tenir caché.
2. La raison invoquée par le demandeur principal pour retourner au travail (subvenir aux besoins de sa famille) n'avait pas de sens puisque ses parents pouvaient s'occuper du bar.
3. Les deux hommes qui ont abordé le demandeur principal au travail ne lui ont causé, après l'altercation, aucun préjudicie physique lorsqu'il se rendait ou bar ou qu'il en revenait.
[61]
Ces conclusions ne tiennent pas compte d'autres éléments pertinents des observations des demandeurs. Par exemple, le demandeur principal a fait valoir que, bien qu'il fût retourné au travail après son mariage, il n'avait été abordé que deux jours plus tard au bar. Il avait d'abord cru que la famille de son épouse ne leur causerait aucun préjudice après leur mariage, mais cet incident l'a amené à réévaluer la menace et, par la suite, à se cacher. Le demandeur principal a également témoigné que, lorsque l'incident s'est produit, des clients qui le connaissaient lui ont porté secours:
[traduction]
Tout le monde est intervenu et voulait voir ce qui se passait et m'aider dans la mesure du possible, et ce sont ces personnes qui en fait m'ont envoyé chez moi immédiatement. Parce qu'ils voyaient que je n'étais pas en sécurité.
[62]
Après ce témoignage, il y a eu une pause à l'audience. Au retour, il n'a plus été discuté de cet incident avec le demandeur principal. Pour cette raison, le fait que la Commission se soit appuyée sur l'absence de préjudice après l'incident et qu'elle n'ait pas interrogé le demandeur principal sur ces événements à l'audience rend contestable sa conclusion sur la crédibilité.
[63]
Par conséquent, quoique la Cour doive faire preuve d'une retenue élevée envers les conclusions de la Commission sur la crédibilité, à mon avis, la Commission ne disposait pas d'éléments suffisants en l'espèce pour remettre en question la crédibilité des demandeurs. La transcription de l'audience montre clairement les difficultés de communication à l'audience, difficultés d'autant plus grandes que l'interprète et les demandeurs parlaient des dialectes différents et que l'interprète a demandé des instructions au milieu de l'audience.
[64]
En résumé, j'estime que la décision de la Commission sur les questions du lien avec un motif prévu par la Convention, de la protection de l'État et de la crédibilité n'était pas raisonnable. Les conclusions de la Commission sur toutes ces questions n'étaient pas justifiables et intelligibles et n'appartenaient pas aux issues acceptables sur le fondement de la preuve dont elle disposait. J'accueillerai par conséquent la demande de contrôle judiciaire, j'annulerai la décision de la Commission et je renverrais l'affaire à un tribunal différemment constitué de la Commission pour qu'il procède à un nouvel examen.
[65]
Les demandeurs ne souhaitaient proposer une question grave de portée générale que si j'avais interprété d'une manière différente la décision <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précitée. Le défendeur n'a pas souhaité proposer une question de portée générale et je ne crois pas qu'une question devrait être certifiée pour les demandeurs.
JUGEMENT
[66]
LA COUR REND LE JUGEMENT suivant
:
1. La demande de contrôle judiciaire est accueillie, la décision de la Commission est annulée et l'affaire est renvoyée à un tribunal différent pour qu'il procède à un nouvel examen.
2. Aucune question grave de portée générale n'est certifiée.
ANNEXE
Les dispositions législatives pertinentes
Loi sur l'immigration et la protection des réfugiés
, LC 2001, ch. 27
72. (1) Le contrôle judiciaire par la Cour fédérale de toute mesure - décision, ordonnance, question ou affaire - prise dans le cadre de la présente loi est subordonné au dépôt d'une demande d'autorisation.
96. A qualité de réfugié au sens de la Convention - le réfugié - la personne qui, craignant avec raison d'être persécutée du fait de sa race, de sa religion, de sa nationalité, de son appartenance à un groupe social ou de ses opinions politiques:
a
) soit se trouve hors de tout pays dont elle a la nationalité et ne peut ou, du fait de cette crainte, ne veut se réclamer de la protection de chacun de ces pays;
b) soit, si elle n'a pas de nationalité et se trouve hors du pays dans lequel elle avait sa résidence habituelle, ne peut ni, du fait de cette crainte, ne veut y retourner.
97. (1) A qualité de personne à protéger la personne qui se trouve au Canada et serait personnellement, par son renvoi vers tout pays dont elle a la nationalité ou, si elle n'a pas de nationalité, dans lequel elle avait sa résidence habituelle, exposée:
a
) soit au risque, s'il y a des motifs sérieux de le croire, d'être soumise à la torture au sens de l'article premier de la Convention contre la torture;
b) soit à une menace à sa vie ou au risque de traitements ou peines cruels et inusités dans le cas suivant:
(i) elle ne peut ou, de ce fait, ne veut se réclamer de la protection de ce pays,
(ii) elle y est exposée en tout lieu de ce pays alors que d'autres personnes originaires de ce pays ou qui s'y trouvent ne le sont généralement pas,
(iii) la menace ou le risque ne résulte pas de sanctions légitimes - sauf celles infligées au mépris des normes internationales - et inhérents à celles-ci ou occasionnés par elles,
(iv) la menace ou le risque ne résulte pas de l'incapacité du pays de fournir des soins médicaux ou de santé adéquats.
72. (1) Judicial review by the Federal Court with respect to any matter - a decision, determination or order made, a measure taken or a question raised - under this Act is commenced by making an application for leave to the Court.
96. A Convention refugee is a person who, by reason of a well-founded fear of persecution for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group or political opinion,
(
a
) is outside each of their countries of nationality and is unable or, by reason of that fear, unwilling to avail themself of the protection of each of those countries; or
(
b
) not having a country of nationality, is outside the country of their former habitual residence and is unable or, by reason of that fear, unwilling to return to that country.
97. (1) A person in need of protection is a person in Canada whose removal to their country or countries of nationality or, if they do not have a country of nationality, their country of former habitual residence, would subject them personally
(
a
) to a danger, believed on substantial grounds to exist, of torture within the meaning of Article 1 of the Convention Against Torture; or
(
b
) to a risk to their life or to a risk of cruel and unusual treatment or punishment if
(i) the person is unable or, because of that risk, unwilling to avail themself of the protection of that country,
(ii) the risk would be faced by the person in every part of that country and is not faced generally by other individuals in or from that country,
(iii) the risk is not inherent or incidental to lawful sanctions, unless imposed in disregard of accepted international standards, and
(iv) the risk is not caused by the inability of that country to provide adequate health or medical care.
[End of document]