[1]
Reed, J.
: The plaintiffs bring an application for an interlocutory injunction to prevent the defendant from infringing patent number 1,222,724 and industrial design registration number 56,231. The patent carries the title "Garment Bag with Improved Packing Capability". The industrial design is with respect to a "locking trolley for luggage". The objects of the patent are summarized as follows:
"An objective of the present invention is to provide a new and improved traveling garment bag in which garments can be packed in a more secure condition that is less susceptible for causing wrinkles. Another objective is to provide a new and improved garment bag in which certain articles like shoes can be packed to obtain better space utilization without creating an unwieldy condition when the bag is folded into the suitcase-like configuration. Still another objective is to provide a new and improved garment bag which allows long garments to be packed in a condition in which the lower portions of the garments are supported in a condition to avoid substantial wrinkling."
It is the last objective which is particularly relevant for the purposes of this case. The locking trolley to which the registered design relates is the mechanism placed in the top interior of garment bags, on which hangers holding the garments are hung.
[2]
The two plaintiffs are referred to in the evidence as Samsonite U.S. (i.e. Samsonite Corporation) and Samsonite Canada (i.e. Samsonite, a division of E-II Consumer Products Canada Inc.). Samsonite U.S. is the owner of the patent and industrial design rights in question. Samsonite Canada has the exclusive right to manufacture and market the products, covered by those rights, in Canada.
[3]
The defendant, Holiday Luggage Inc., is the Canadian licensee of a United States company, American Tourister. This action concerns garment bags produced by Holiday and garment bags produced by American Tourister. The American Tourister bags are marketed in Canada by Holiday.
[4]
As with all applications for interlocutory injunctions, the argument focuses around three issues: the strength of the plaintiffs' case; the degree of harm which will arise from the withholding or granting of an injunction (irreparable harm); the balance of convenience as between the parties which the granting or withholding of an injunction will create. In addition, argument was addressed to the fact that interlocutory injunctions are granted to preserve the status quo as well as to equitable considerations (in this case, whether there had been delay in seeking the interlocutory injunction).
Applicable Law
[5]
Since the decision by the House of Lords in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at 405-409, there seems to have been considerable uncertainty as to when an applicant, in seeking an interlocutory injunction, need prove a "prima facie case" as opposed to a "serious question to be tried". Some decisions have treated the two tests as equivalents. Others see the test of a "prima facie case" as being more stringent than that of a "serious question to be tried". I recently had occasion to refer to some of this jurisprudence in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ]. Despite this uncertainty, both counsel agree, I think, that regardless of the verbal formulation in which the test is framed (prima facie case or serious question to be tried) what the courts in fact do, when faced with an application for an interlocutory injunction, is to adjust the demands for a strong case by reference to the irreparable harm (or balance of convenience) which will result from the giving or withholding of an injunction. Thus, if the plaintiff appears to have a strong case, he will be required to prove less by way of "irreparable harm" (or balance of convenience). If the plaintiffs' case is less strong, however, he will be required to prove more by way of "irreparable harm" (or balance of convenience). I agree with this analysis.
[6]
The analysis articulated by Mr. Justice Owen in Société de développement de la  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at page 183, was quoted:
"... First the applicant has to convince the court that he appears to be entitled to an interlocutory injunction, that is that the right he is asserting has a reasonable prospect of being recognized by the final judgment. Secondly the applicant, if successful on the first test, then has to show that it is an exceptional case in which an interlocutory injunction is necessary in order to avoid: (i) serious or irreparable injury to the applicant, or (ii) a factual or legal situation of such a nature as to render the final judgment ineffectual.
...
"At the interlocutory injunction stage these [the applicant's] rights are apparently either (a) clear, or (b) doubtful, or (c) nonexistent.
(a) If it appears clear, at the interlocutory stage that the Petitioners have the rights which they invoke then the interlocutory injunction should be granted if considered necessary in accordance with the provisions of the second paragraph of article 752 C.P.
(b) However, if at this stage the existence of the rights invoked by the Petitioners appears doubtful then the court should consider the balance of convenience and inconvenience in deciding whether an interlocutory injunction should be granted.
(c) Finally if it appears, at the interlocutory stage, that the rights claimed are nonexistent then the interlocutory injunction should be refused."
[7]
Mr. Justice Owen's comments were of course made in reference to article 752 of the Quebec Code Of Civil Procedure. That does not, however, detract from their usefulness. Also, while those comments seem to distinguish between considerations relating to "irreparable harm" and "balance of convenience", those concepts are, in fact, overlapping concepts. Evidence which demonstrates "irreparable harm" will also be relevant to the determination of "balance of convenience". It is difficult to separate the assessment of factors relevant to each. I, therefore, shall deal with these issues together, after having considered "the strength of the plaintiffs' case". It should be noted that the Supreme Court of Canada recently in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Man.R.(2d) 241, indicated that considerations of "irreparable injury" might alternatively be considered in the context of an assessment of "balance of convenience". It is necessary, then, to consider: (1) the strength of the plaintiffs' case in relation to (2) the irreparable harm and balance of convenience considerations which pertain.
[8]
Mr. Justice Owen refers to interlocutory injunctions as being granted in "exceptional cases". It is clear from the context of his remarks, however, that he is not intending to add any additional requirement to the usual considerations relevant in determining whether an interlocutory injunction should be granted. While reference is occasionally made, in the jurisprudence, to interlocutory injunctions as "extraordinary remedies", I have not been able to find any elucidation of this concept in that jurisprudence. It may be that the characterization of interlocutory injunctions as "extraordinary" is primarily a reference to the historical origin of the remedy in the courts of equity. In that context, the remedy was developed for cases where the "ordinary" common law remedies were inadequate; the remedy was in this sense, clearly "extraordinary". This perception is reflected in Maitland's description of equity as "supplementary law", and "a sort of gloss written round our code" (F.W. Maitland, Equity: A Course Of Lectures, revd. by J. Brunyate (Cambridge, University Press, 1936 at p. 18). In terms of a modern day context, to the characterization of interlocutory injunctions as "extraordinary", I can only give that characterization meaning by concluding that it refers to the fact that in granting an interlocutory injunction, that order may determine the rights of one of the parties to the proceedings, to the detriment of the other (if only on an interim basis) with less than a full hearing of the evidence having occurred. Perhaps in that sense such orders are "extraordinary".
[9]
It is, of course, trite law that the court, on an interlocutory injunction application, does not determine the merits of the dispute; such determination is for the trial judge. At the same time, it has to be frankly recognized that, as a practical matter, in many intellectual property cases, the interlocutory stage
is
determinative. This arises because some issues, such as the existence or not of copying, are matters determined by "the eye of the court", for which detailed evidence is not usually of much assistance. Also, the issuing or not of interlocutory injunctions (in this court, at least) is determined on motion supported by extensive affidavits on which full cross-examination has been allowed. In many cases, the evidence before the court on such motions is not greatly different from that which would be adduced at trial. (This may be different from the summary procedure followed in some other courts where such full examination of the evidence is not available at an interlocutory stage).
[10]
The second aspect of the applicable law about which much argument revolved in this case is the extent to which there are special rules or considerations which dictate that interlocutory injunctions are not usually given in patent cases. Counsel for the defendant argues that in patent cases it is very rare for interlocutory injunctions to be granted. He argues that, in patent cases, interlocutory injunctions are refused when: (i) the validity or infringement of the patent in issue is disputed; (ii) the patent is of recent origin; (iii) the validity of the patent has not been established by a court decision; (iv) the defendant is willing to keep an accounting of profits, which accounting can lead to an effective compensatory award to the plaintiff after trial [see footnote 1]. All of these circumstances favour not granting an interlocutory injunction in this case.
[11]
Counsel for the plaintiffs argues, on the other hand, that there is no rational basis for treating patent rights differently from other intellectual property rights, or indeed from other types of cases in which interlocutory injunctions are sought and granted. He argues that to refuse to grant interlocutory injunctions in patent cases effectively encourages piracy of patent rights since an infringing defendant is given, by that refusal, a compulsory licence to manufacture and market the invention during the life of the litigation - which can sometimes exceed the economic life of the product. In the present case, there is evidence that the economic life of garment bags is approximately five years. I understand "economic life" to refer to the period of time during which one can expect an innovative product to be commercially viable, before being overtaken by another more innovative version of the product. Consideration of the respective arguments with respect to the applicable rules in patent cases will be dealt with under the rubric irreparable harm (balance of convenience).
Strength of Plaintiffs' Case
[12]
It is necessary, first, to make a preliminary assessment of the strength of the plaintiffs' case without making a determination of the merits. In this case, the strength of the plaintiffs' case must be analyzed with respect to three main issues: (1) the validity of patent number 1,222,724; (2) the likelihood that infringement of that patent exists; (3) the likelihood that the plaintiffs' registered industrial design has been copied.
(1)
validity of patent number 1,222,724
[13]
The defendant argues that the particular claims of the plaintiffs' patent are invalid as involving no inventive ingenuity, as being anticipated and obvious. Before considering these issues, it is first of all necessary to describe the plaintiffs' patent in more detail. The patent describes the problem to be solved as follows:
"At the lower end of the garment bag, the clothes are usually left free. If the garment is a long one, such as a lady's dress or a long coat, the bottom part of it is usually wrinkled because it is bunched in the bottom of the bag. Even when the bag is folded, the bottoms of the long clothes still remain in bunches in the bottom of the bag."
And that part of the invention which addresses this problem is described as follows:
"... an improvement ... comprising: garment holding means connected to the lower portion of the interior panel and operative at a surface of the lower portion of the interior panel facing the interior space and operative for holding and supporting the lower portions of long garments in a folded U-shaped configuration spaced above the bottom gusset of the bag where the interior panel is selectively connected to the side and top gussets.
"When the interior panel is connected to the remaining portion of the garment bag to thereby enclose the garments within the bag, the lower portion of the relatively long garment is folded in a U-shaped configuration and is retained against the lower portion of the interior panel. In this manner, the lower portions of relatively long garments are prevented from occupying the bottom of the garment bag in a crumpled bunch."
The invention is depicted pictorially in figures 3 and 4 of the patent:
[Diagram omitted. See original source.]
The actual claims in issue are numbers 28 to 31 inclusive:
"28. An improved garment bag of the type adapted to fold into a suitcase-like configuration for traveling and having an interior space within which to pack garments, the interior space formed essentially by an exterior panel, a left and a right vertical side gusset, a top gusset, a bottom gusset, and an interior panel flexibly connected to the bottom gusset and selectively removably connected to the top and side gussets, said garment bag further including means located within the interior space of the garment bag and operative for supporting the middle portion of garments packed therein when the garment bag is folded into the suitcase-like configuration, and an improvement in combination therewith comprising:
garment holding means connected to the lower portion of the interior panel and operative at a surface of the lower portion of the interior panel facing the interior space and operative for holding and supporting the lower portions of long garments in a folded U-shaped configuration spaced above the bottom gusset of the bag when the interior panel is selectively connected to the side and top gussets.
"29. An improved garment bag as defined in claim 28 further comprising:
means for stiffening the lower portion of the interior panel against bending.
"30. An improved garment bag as defined in claim 29 wherein:
the stiffening means comprises a frame member extending generally around the perimeter of the lower portion of the interior panel.
"31. An improved garment bag as defined in claim 30 wherein:
the garment holding means includes at least one belt extending horizontally across the lower portion of the interior panel."
[14]
The defendant challenges the claims on the ground that claim 28 is anticipated by two prior art patents (Kish and Krynoski) and that all of the claims, 28 to 31, are invalid as being obvious in the light of some fourteen prior art patents (particularly Kish and Krynoski when read together with Davis).
[15]
There is no evidence as to whether the luggage covered by the prior art cited to me has or has not been manufactured and marketed. Some of it may have been, but as far as the evidence in this application is concerned, that evidence consists almost entirely of what counsel for the plaintiffs has described as old patents "grubbed up" from the patent office with 20-20 hindsight. As he says "the prior art has been sieved with claim 28". At the same time, it is clear that some of the features contained in the prior art patents are common knowledge (the use of straps to hold garments in a packed condition and thus avoid wrinkling; the use of stiff partitions in suitcases against which to fold garments such as shirts and suits). The particular combination of features found in the plaintiffs' patent, however, is not found in one place in the prior art and I am not convinced, on the basis of the evidence, that it would have been obvious to a workman skilled in the art to put together the particular combination which the plaintiffs have patented.
[16]
The defendant's argument, that claim 28 is anticipated and claims 28 to 31 are obvious, relies particularly on three of the prior art patents: U.S. patent no. 2,596,412 (Kish); U.S. patent no. 3,164,231 (Krynoski); U.S. patent no. 2,740,506 (Davis). The Kish patent issued in 1952 and contained an apron the full length of the flap (interior panel). This enclosed long garments to facilitate their packing. The upper end of this apron was stiffened by a metal bar to provide a well defined fold line for the middle of the garments. But there was no focus on trying to prevent long garments from bunching at the bottom of the bag by securing them to the lower portion of the interior panel. There was no mechanism suggested for holding the garments in place once the bag was closed and folded. Rather, the concept embodied in the Kish patent seems to be designed to ensure that the long garments would be folded in four when the bag was closed in a folded position; and, a boxed space at the bottom would thereby be freed for shoes and other such articles. I do not think that this patent is likely to be held to anticipate the plaintiffs' patent.
[17]
The Krynoski patent, which issued in 1965, relates to what is called "a folding wardrobe bag ... particularly suitable for use with mens' suits, or other similar relatively short garments". The patent indicates that the bag can also be used for longer garments. The flap (interior panel) carries a pair of retainer flaps which fasten over the bottom of the garments being packed "so as to secure the garment in a manner which is less susceptible to wrinkling than as in the usual type of packing arrangement". The rectangular flaps also serve as a fold line. This patent focusses on short garments and on folding them in the middle. It does not teach the prevention of "bunching" in the bottom of a garment bag. I do not think it likely that it could be held to anticipate the plaintiffs' patent.
[18]
The Davis patent, which issued in 1954, contained a stiffened area on the interior panel, as well as stiffened portions on other areas of the bag. It is clear that the purpose of the stiffening was to allow the bag to stand up right when in a closed position. Counsel for the defendant argues that this patent should be read together with either or both Kish and Krynoski, for a finding that the plaintiffs' patent was obvious. I do not think one could base a finding of obviousness out of the reading together of these patents. Also, I do not think a finding of obviousness would arise on the reading of all fourteen prior art patents together. In coming to these conclusions, I am aware that eleven of the fourteen patents are now more than thirty years old. I echo the words of my colleague, Mr. Justice Strayer, in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ), at page 21 [of his reasons for judgment and p. 61 F.T.R.]:
"No evidence was produced by the defendants to show that the ordinary skilled workman should be assumed to have been aware of all of this prior art. Frankly I find it difficult to believe that several of the items of prior art would have been present to the mind of the ordinary skilled workman in 1981."
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 90, it was held:
"There is authority for holding that the court should look askance at the effort of a party to defeat a new and useful invention by the plea that it was obvious. That plea is frequently the last resort of the infringer ..."
And more recently in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 289, at 294, the Federal Court of Appeal stated:
"The test for obviousness is not to ask what competent inventors did or would have done to solve the problem. Inventors are by definition inventive. The classical touchstone for obviousness is the technician skilled in the art but having no scintilla of inventiveness or imagination; a paragon of deduction and dexterity, wholly devoid of intuition; a triumph of the left hemisphere over the right. The question to be asked is whether this mythical creature (the man in the Clapham omnibus of patent law) would, in the light of the state of the art and of common general knowledge as at the claimed date of invention, have come directly and without difficulty to the solution taught by the patent.
It is a very difficult test to satisfy
." (underlining added)
See also  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at page 48 (F.C.T.D.).
[19]
Counsel for the defendant argues that claim 28 is too broad: that it claims more than the invention made because it does not include any reference to a stiffened lower portion of the interior panel. Mr. Nordstrom, a designer employed by the plaintiff, Samsonite Corporation, was asked (cross-examination of January 20, 1988, page 80, question 378) whether wrinkle avoidance would be accomplished by the use of straps (garment holding means) on the interior panel, without that panel being stiffened in any way. He responded: "I believe it would not perform the function intended without the stiffening in the panel". Mr. Palser, Director of Marketing for Samsonite Canada, was asked (cross-examination of January 20, 1988, page 75, questions 272-273) whether it was necessary to have some sort of metal frame or other stiffening means around the lower portions of the interior panel for the invention to work. He responded: "Let's say in my experience it works functionally better if you have a stiffening panel". He was asked: "Would it work at all if you didn't have a stiffening panel, if you simply have a fabric panel?" He answered: "Possibly, I don't know". It is argued by counsel for the defendant that claim 28 does not contain any reference to a stiffening means and therefore is invalid because it lacks utility. I note that even if there is a reasonable likelihood that this argument would prevail at trial, claims 29, 30 and 31 would still be intact and the defendant's garment bags allegedly also infringe those.
[20]
The defendant argues that claims 28 to 30 make no reference to the corner pockets and therefore are too broadly framed. I do not find this argument convincing. The corner pockets are mentioned elsewhere in the claims. It seems to me the three aspects claimed by the plaintiffs' patent are interrelated so that they can validly exist side by side in one patent, but I was not referred to any jurisprudence which holds that all features of a patent must be mentioned in every claim.
[21]
I do not accept, however, the argument that the commercial success of the garment bag demonstrates, in this case, the inventiveness of the claims in issue, or their lack of obviousness. The patent under discussion and the garment bags being marketed by the plaintiffs contain three aspects: the corner compartments; the upperstraps and middle rod; the lower garment holding means and stiffened panel. Only one of the three aspects of the bag is in dispute in this application (the garment holding means and stiffened panel). I do not think the commercial success of the bag as a whole can be evidence of the inventiveness of one of the aspects only, unless there is explicit evidence to this effect. When more than one aspect of a product is involved, the commercial success of the whole may very well be due to one of the other of the aspects of the patent and not to that in dispute.
(2)
infringement of the patent
[22]
There is no textual infringement by the defendant of the plaintiffs' patent. Officers of American Tourister admit that that company took the best features of the plaintiffs' bag in designing its own. At the same time, they attempted not to infringe the plaintiffs' patent. The garment bags being sold by the defendant were purposely "designed around" the plaintiffs' patent. The defendant's garment bags do not have a stiffened lower portion of the interior panel. Instead, a stiffened small divider panel has been inserted inside the bag to serve the same function. This additional insert has garment holding means (straps) on one side for the holding of long garments which are then held in a U-shaped fashion when the bag is closed. The reverse side of the added panel has pockets for items such as shoes.
[23]
As noted above, there are two garment bags which are alleged to infringe the plaintiffs' patent. These are Holiday's "Jetliner", the "Ultimate" garment bag, and American Tourister's "The Organizer". The divider type panel which has been added is connected in the "Ultimate" bag to the lower front seam, that is, to the seam between the interior panel and the bottom gusset. The divider type panel which has been added to "The Organizer", is connected to the lower back seam, that is, the seam between the exterior panel and the bottom gusset. As between the "Ultimate" and the plaintiffs' "The World's Greatest Garment Bag", there is less functional difference than is the case as between "The Organizer" and the plaintiffs' bag. In fact, if one stapled the extra panel, which has been inserted into the "Ultimate" bag, to the front interior panel of that bag, there would be a textual infringement of the plaintiffs' patent. But the panel, when in use is, of course, not so stapled. In the case of "The Organizer", the functional difference between it and the plaintiffs' garment bag is that long garments never touch the bottom gusset of "The Organizer" (in the plaintiffs', "The World's Greatest Garment Bags", they do so). The extra divider panel in "The Organizer" bag, being connected to the back seam of the bag, keeps long garments from ever touching the bottom gusset. While the plaintiff clearly seeks an injunction to prevent the marketing of both the "Ultimate" and "The Organizer", counsel for both parties indicated that the defendant had given notice that it, in any event, was going to cease manufacturing and marketing the "Ultimate".
[24]
I would note that the plaintiffs admit that s. 58 of the Patent Act, R.S.C. 1970, c. P-4, applies with respect to 700 of the defendant's "Ultimate" garment bags (205 of which still remain in the defendant's hands):
"58. Every person who, before the issuing of a patent has purchased, constructed or acquired any invention for which a patent is afterwards obtained under this Act, has the right of using and vending to others the specific article, machine, manufacture or composition of matter patented and so purchased, constructed or acquired before the issue of the patent therefore, without being liable to the patentee or his legal representatives for so doing; but the patent shall not, as regards other persons, be held invalid by reason of such purchase, construction or acquisition or use of the invention by the person first mentioned, or by those to whom he has sold it, unless it was purchased, constructed, acquired or used for a longer period than two years before the application for a patent therefore, in consequence whereof the invention became public and available to public use."
[25]
The question to be answered is whether the defendant, in producing and marketing "The Organizer" and "The Ultimate", has taken the substance of the plaintiffs' invention. The test is not in dispute. It was discussed in Nelson  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Ont. H. Ct.), at page 729-730. That court referred to the Federal Court of Appeal decision in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> :
"'A useful review of the law on this subject is found in the judgment of the former President of the Exchequer Court in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ].'
"Counsel for the plaintiffs rely on the reference to the Catnic case as an accurate statement of the law as to infringement, and claim that this rather terse reference by Thurlow, C.J., incorporates it in the patent law of Canada.
"The first case,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Fox Pat. C. 1; [1956-60] Ex. C.R. 467, was decided by Thorson, P., who, in the course of extended and learned reasons applied the test in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  marrow' test succinctly stated in another authority quoted by the learned President [at p. 158], the judgment of Parker, J., in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 217:
'It is a well-known rule of Patent law that no one who borrows the substance of a patented invention can escape the consequences of infringement by making immaterial variations. From this point of view, the question is whether the infringing apparatus is substantially the same as the apparatus said to have been infringed.'
"Turning to  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , before the House of Lords in the latter part of 1980, Lord Diplock, with whom the remainder of the House agreed, restoring the judgment at trial, had this to say at pp. 65-66:
'My Lords, a patent specification is a unilateral statement by the patentee, in words of his own choosing, addressed to those likely to have a practical interest in the subject matter of his invention (i.e. "skilled in the art"), by which he informs them what he claims to be the essential features of the new product or process for which the letters patent grant him a monopoly. It is those novel features only that he claims to be essential that constitute the socalled "pith and marrow" of the claim. A patent specification should be given a purposive construction rather than a purely literal one derived from applying to it the kind of meticulous verbal analysis in which lawyers are too often tempted by their training to indulge. The question in each case is: whether persons with practical knowledge and experience of the kind of work in which the invention was intended to be used, would understand that strict compliance with a particular descriptive word or phrase appearing in a claim was intended by the patentee to be an essential requirement of the invention so that any variant would fall outside the monopoly claimed, even though it could have no material effect upon the way the invention worked.
'The question, of course, does not arise where the variant would in fact have a material effect upon the way the invention worked. Nor does it arise unless at the date of publication of the specification it would be obvious to the informed reader that this was so. Where it is not obvious, in the light of then existing knowledge, the reader is entitled to assume that the patentee thought at the time of the specification that he had good reason for limiting his monopoly so strictly and had intended to do so, even though subsequent work by him or others in the field of the invention might show the limitation to have been unnecessary. It is to be answered in the negative only when it would be apparent to any reader skilled in the art that a particular descriptive word or phrase used in a claim cannot have been intended by a patentee, who was also skilled in the art, to exclude minor variants which, to the knowledge of both him and the readers to whom the patent was addressed, could have no material effect upon the way in which the invention worked.'"
The issue was also addressed by Mr. Justice Mahoney in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at page 146:
"In my view, the defendant has appropriated the invention of the connection patent. The refinement of creating the projections during the 'squeeze' stage may well be a significant improvement on the patented method but that is what it remains; it is not a new or different method. The substance of the patented method remains in the defendant's method. As has been said, perhaps more colourfully than the present situation warrants,
'... if the pith and marrow of the invention is taken it is no excuse to say that you have added something, or omitted something, even if the addition or omission be useful and valuable. The superadding of ingenuity to a robbery does not make the operation justifiable.'"
My reading of this jurisprudence leads me to conclude that in order to find substantial infringement, one must ask: (1) do the two articles operate functionally in the same way (in the words of the Catnic case: "whether the variant would have a material effect on the way the invention worked"); (2) even if they do so operate, is it clear from the text of the patent that the variant which is challenged as an infringement was one which was intended to be covered by the patent, even though the words of the text do not actually so provide. In the words of counsel for the defendant, "is it part of the territory which the patentee has fenced off".
[26]
In the present case, it is clear that all three garment bags perform the function of preventing bunching at the bottom of the bag. The plaintiffs' "World's Greatest Garment Bag" does so by stiffening the interior panel. The defendant's "Ultimate" and "Organizer" bags do so by adding insert panels (in one case, connected to the back lower seam). This may have improved on the plaintiffs' invention, but, as Mr. Justice Mahoney said in the Varta case, if one can say that the substance of the plaintiffs' patented invention remains in the defendant's innovation, there will still be infringement. After careful consideration, however, it seems more likely than not that the defendant's variant is materially different from the plaintiffs' way of accomplishing the purpose of preventing bunching at the bottom of the bag. It seems more likely than not that the variant is not one "fenced off by the patent", giving that patent a purposive construction.
[27]
In coming to this conclusion, I have looked closely at the decisions in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , affirmed (1983), 68 C.P.R.(2d) 179, and at the Varta case mentioned above. In both those cases, there were physical differences between the infringing article and the patented article. The differences between the two, however, were minor when one looks at the overall functional operation of the patents in issue.
[28]
In the Cutter case, the plaintiff claimed infringement of a patent for a multiple blood bag system. In both the patented and the defendant's system, the tube leading to the blood bag was sealed off by a plastic membrane, and an unattached piercing device was situated in the tube near the membrane. In the patented system, the piercing device was a free moving, unattached cannula (hollow tube). In the defendant's system, the piercing device was a pointed, vaned spike, cruciate in its cross-section, which fitted loosely in the tube. It was held in place by friction against two small protrusion's on its opposing vanes until used to perforate the membrane. The court found textual infringement of the patent but also considered the issue of substantial infringement. The Federal Court of Appeal agreed with the trial judge who had found that the defendant's spike was the functional equivalent of the patentee's cannula:
"Both are operated by the technician in the same way. Both rupture the membrane and establish a channel or channels through which blood or its anti-coagulants can flow. Both do it in the same way ... Moreover, both devices are in the tube and are unattached. (page 199)"
The court then went on to find that the precise structure of the piercing device was not an essential element of the invention. The substance of the invention would be taken as long as the device had "the essential elements of being in the tube and being unattached".
[29]
In the Varta case, the patent related to a method to effect the electrical connection of adjoining cells in a storage battery and to seal the aperture in the partition between the cells with the connecting material. The main difference between the patented connection method and the defendant's method was that in the former the metal to seal the aperture came from projections on the connector lugs and in the latter, the metal necessary to fill the aperture was provided by squeezing the lugs. Otherwise, the two methods were identical.
[30]
In the present case, while the same purpose is served by the two garment bags, it seems to me that they accomplish that purpose in materially different ways. As counsel for the defendant argued, they can only be said to be functional equivalents if function is expressed at a very general level. The plaintiffs' garment bag and patent provides for the prevention of bunching by the stiffening of the interior panel, by the attachment of garment holding means to the interior panel. The defendant's garment bags accomplish the purpose of preventing bunching by adding an additional panel to the interior of the bag. That panel serves the purpose, not only of having the garment holding means attached to it, but also of providing pockets for shoes and other comparable items (on the reverse side of the panel). Also, the text of the plaintiffs' patent does not indicate to me that there was an intention to "fence off" a broad spectrum of functional equivalents. The patent is specifically addressed to garment holding means added to the
interior panel
and to the stiffening of the
interior panel
. I think it likely that the defendant's addition of a small interior divider panel, for the purpose of accomplishing the same function, would be said to fall outside the monopoly claimed.
(3)
registered design number 56,231
[31]
The defendant challenges the plaintiffs' registered design on a number of grounds: the trolleys were not marked in accordance with s. 14(1) of the Industrial Design Act, R.S.C. 1970, c. I-8, and therefore, the plaintiffs are not entitled to the protection of the Act; the design was published more than one year before its registration in Canada; the trolley is an article which is not seen by the public, which serves a solely functional purpose, and therefore is not properly the subject of an industrial design registration; the defendant's trolley is not a copy of the plaintiffs' design.
[32]
With respect to the first argument, I recently had occasion to refer to the unsettled nature of the law in this area in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  1988). With respect to the second point, there is no convincing evidence that such publication occurred. With respect to the third point, the fact that an article is purely functional does not mean that it cannot be protected by design registration. Indeed, the essence of good design is that there be a unity of form (appearance) and function. If the appearance of an article is
totally
dictated by the function it performs, then it may be that that article is not a proper subject for design registration. (It is difficult to conceive of such an article although certain types of machine parts may qualify.) In any event, for the purposes of this application, a consideration of the last point suffices. The test for the infringement of a registered design is "the eye of the court" (see pages 7 to 9 of the Lipski decision, supra). In this case, my preliminary assessment, without finally deciding the issue, is that it would be very unlikely that the plaintiffs will win in asserting that its design is infringed by that of the defendant. The two designs do not look at all alike. It is clear that the defendant has taken the plaintiffs' idea for a two track locking trolley; a trolley that will take ordinary hangers instead of those especially designed for use in luggage bags. It is equally clear, however, that the two trolleys are quite different in appearance (in design). I do not propose to compare them element by element for such is a tedious process. Suffice it to say that the nature of the trolley mechanism itself imposes certain constraints as to size and shape on the object. But, that being said, it is quite clear that the designs are different.
Irreparable Harm - Balance of Convenience
[33]
As noted above, counsel for the defendant argues that the granting of interlocutory injunctions in patent cases is rare because damages are, in general, an adequate remedy. Counsel's review of the jurisprudence leads him to conclude that exceptions to this general rule exist where: (1) the patent is coming to the end of its life and the courts are quick to prevent infringement operating as an early spring board into the market by a competitor; (2) the validity of the patent and its infringement has already been adjudicated (perhaps by a foreign court); (3) the defendant's financial position is insubstantial (a "fly-by night" defendant); (4) the plaintiff and defendant occupy vastly disparate market positions, such that the larger, in the interim, could inflict serious harm on the smaller; (5) the product is not yet on the market and a quia timet injunction is being sought.
[34]
In my view, this analysis is a bit oversimplified. The Patent Act is designed to give an inventor a monopoly over the invention for 17 years. An inventor is given the right to exploit the product in the market for 17 years, free of competition. With such a right goes more than the mere right to sell the product; it includes the right to sell the product at a price free of competition, except from the next closest
noninfringing
product. What the nongranting of an interlocutory injunction imposes on the holder of a valid patent right is competition in the market place with respect to the invention (and thus, in all probability, sales at a lower price) for the duration of the litigation. This as noted above, can exceed the commercial life of the product.
[35]
In addition to the higher rate of return that might be charged in the absence of competition by an infringing product, the holder of a patent also loses the access to increased market share and other similar spinoffs which the exercise of the monopoly right would otherwise give him. In the present case, for example, the simultaneous or future purchases of matching pieces of luggage is one such non-quantifiable loss. In addition, the inventor-manufacturer's reputation as an innovator in the market place is undercut by the infringement even though such infringement be temporary in nature. And, the infringer free loads on the innovator's research and development costs. The market edge gained from innovation which is lost as a result of an unimpeded infringement is not easily quantifiable.
[36]
I simply do not accept that there is a presumption that interlocutory injunctions should not be granted in patent cases. I note that the requirement that damages be considered an inadequate remedy is equally a requirement for the granting of a permanent injunction as it is for the granting of one at the interlocutory stage. Yet it has never been doubted that the granting of permanent injunctions is appropriate in patent cases. One can pose the rhetorical question "why have the courts not ordered infringers to simply keep an accounting of all profits in the future and pay those over to the defendant, after the full trial of an issue, rather than granting an injunction"? There may very well be considerations respecting the continual enforcement of such an order but I think the failure to grant such orders is primarily based on the view that damages are not an adequate remedy. If damages are not an adequate remedy after trial, it is equally the case that they are not an adequate remedy at the interlocutory stage. In my view, the basis of the courts' reluctance to grant an interlocutory injunction in patent cases must be found elsewhere. I think that reluctance arises from a hesitation about determining rights (even for a temporary period of time) on less than full evidence. In addition, the balance of convenience may often tip in favour of the defendant because it may be comparatively easier to calculate the damages which a plaintiff will suffer as a result of not granting the injunction than it is to calculate the damages a defendant would suffer should the interlocutory injunction have been wrongly given.
[37]
The plaintiff, Samsonite Canada, and the defendant, Holiday, are equally strong in the Canadian market place [see footnote 2]. Thus, the granting or withholding of an injunction, in this case, is not likely to have an irreparably destructive effect on either. Both can pay any damages that might arise out of a final determination at trial. Both purchase their respective garment bags from the Orient; thus, no dislocation of a local work force would result from the granting or withholding of an injunction. The defendant's garment bag is not inferior in quality to the plaintiffs' (although the plaintiffs point out that in the absence of an injunction they will have no control over this factor).
[38]
Counsel for the defendant's main argument, however, is not based on the adequacy of damages as a remedy for the plaintiffs. They are not adequate. Rather, the argument is based on the comparative ease of calculation as between the plaintiff and the defendant, with respect to damages suffered, if the interlocutory injunction should turn out to have been erroneously given. The defendant argues that plaintiffs' losses would be at least partly quantifiable. There would be at least a beginning point from which to try to assess such damages (i.e. the defendant's sales of the infringing product). At the same time, it is argued that the damages the defendant might suffer, if an injunction were erroneously given, would be far more difficult to calculate. Counsel argues: "you cannot quantify what did not happen". Or, in other words, the balance of convenience dictates that an interlocutory injunction not be given.
Equities - Delay
[39]
In this case, the defendant argues that the plaintiffs should not be granted an injunction because they knew about the defendant's infringing product months before they took action to try to stop the defendant from marketing the product. It is alleged that employees of the plaintiffs saw the "Organizer" bag at a trade show in Toronto on May 3 to 5, 1987. The Samsonite and Holiday booths were close to each other at that show; Holiday had the "Organizer" bag on display. A Mr. Palser, the representative of the plaintiffs, originally swore that Samsonite employees had not seen the bag. He asserted that if they had, they would have mentioned it and prompt action would have been taken to alert Holiday to the Samsonite claim. It was subsequently discovered that two Samsonite employees had seen the bag (a Mr. Fitzgerald and a Mr. Gifford). One of the defendant's employees recalled speaking to these two gentlemen at the show.
[40]
My conclusion from the disputed facts, in this regard, is that Samsonite did not delay in presenting its claim for infringement. Some of the Samsonite employees did see the "Organizer" bag at the show, but they were salesmen, not persons in charge of watching for patent infringement by competitors. Also, it is not clear that they saw the lower part of the bag which embodies the claims in dispute in this action. The videotape which was produced, showed the "Organizer" bag on display at the show, but with the bottom folded up. The employees of one company do not wander readily into the booths of their competitors, at such shows, even though the purpose of the show is to inform the trade about the luggage that each is presently marketing. It is my view that the Samsonite employees who saw the defendant's "Organizer" at the show, either with or without the bottom folded up, did not report that fact to the appropriate supervisor (it was not their job to look for infringement). It simply does not make sense for the plaintiffs to have known about the alleged infringement for six months and to have done nothing. This is not what the plaintiffs did in the case of another infringing bag about which they knew (the Stradellina bag). There would be no reason for the plaintiffs to delay in such a case. In my view, there was no delay. The plaintiffs acted as soon as they discovered the alleged infringement.
[41]
The plaintiffs argue that, in any event, they unknowingly sent the defendants a cease and desist letter on June 23, 1987, demanding that it not infringe the patent. It is argued that this covers not only the Stradellina bag to which it is specifically addressed, but the "Ultimate" and the "Organizer" as well. That letter reads as follows:
"
VIA COURIER
Holiday Luggage Mfg. Co. Inc.
4875 des Grandes Prairies
Montreal, Quebec
Re: Infringement of Canadian Patent 1,222,724
Gentlemen:
Your attention is respectfully directed to the subject patent. A copy of the text and drawings of this patent, which issued on June 9, 1987 to Samsonite Corporation, is enclosed for your convenience.
It is our understanding that your company is currently marketing a line of garment bags in Canada, designated 'Stradellina'.
It is clear from our examination of a sample of your garment bag that your making, using or selling of this garment bag infringes the subject patent. This letter is to formally notify you, your agents, employees and representatives that you must immediately cease and desist from any further manufacture, sale, use or offering for sale of products which infringe the subject patent.
It is hereby demanded that, within ten (10) days from the date of this letter, you provide me with written confirmation that you will no longer make, use or sell or offer for sale these garment bags, or any other products which infringe the subject patent.
If you fail to comply with the foregoing by the above dealine, we will be forced to seek immediate and complete legal redress against you.
It is our sincere belief that upon careful consideration of the foregoing you will comply with this letter.
Very truly yours,
Gregory W. O'Connor
Patent Counsel"
Counsel for the plaintiffs argues that the phrase "or any other products which infringe the subject patent" is a demand which the defendant should have known covered both the "Ultimate" and the "Organizer" bags. If these two garment bags were in fact infringements of the plaintiffs' patent, I think the letter could be construed as warning the defendant in a general way not to market them. But the letter, of course, cannot be construed as specifically related to the "Ultimate" and "Organizer" bags.
Status Quo
[42]
There is one other argument made by the defendant with which I must deal. The defendant argues that interlocutory injunctions are granted to preserve the status quo and that the status quo is that existing at the time the application for an interlocutory injunction is heard. Since, at the time this application was heard, both the defendant and the plaintiffs were in the market place, selling their respective garment bags, it is argued an injunction should not be granted to upset that situation. It is argued that to do so would upset, not preserve, the status quo. I have great difficulty with this argument. I must admit frankly that I do not know what the "status quo" requirement adds to the analysis of whether or not an interlocutory injunction should be granted. Literally, it would seem to indicate that injunctions should always be granted when sought at the quia timet stage but never granted at a later period of time. It seems to me the phrase is used, in the cases where the plaintiff is successful, to refer to the status quo before the defendant commenced the infringing action, and in the cases where the defendant is successful, to the status quo at a time after the infringing action has commenced. In the American Cyanamid case (supra, at p. 408) Lord Diplock referred to the status quo in the following passage:
"Where other factors appear to be evenly balanced it is a counsel of prudence to take such measures as are calculated to preserve the status quo. If the defendant is enjoined temporarily from doing something that he has not done before, the only effect of the interlocutory injunction in the event of his succeeding at the trial is to postpone the date at which he is able to embark on a course of action which he has not previously found it necessary to undertake; whereas to interrupt him in the conduct of an established enterprise would cause much greater inconvenience to him since he would have to start again to establish it in the event of his succeeding at the trial."
The status quo requirement framed thus seems to me to be merely a reiteration of one of the factors which enters into balance of convenience considerations, i.e. the disadvantages attendant upon dislocating an established enterprise.
Evidentiary Considerations
(1)
expert evidence by a patent agent
[43]
As noted above, the defendant argues that the plaintiffs' patent is invalid, that it involves no inventive ingenuity, and is obvious in light of the prior art. Counsel for the defendant relies on the expert evidence of Mr. Finchman and some fourteen prior art patents for his argument. Counsel for the plaintiffs objected to the expert evidence of Mr. Finchman on the ground that he was not a properly qualified expert. Mr. Finchman is a patent agent with training in organic chemistry. He does not have experience in the luggage industry, although he has some slight acquaintance with patents for that industry.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 164-165 (F.C.T.D.), the evidence of a patent agent was rejected. This was done, not because expert evidence on the ultimate issues of obviousness and anticipation was thought to be, per se, inadmissible, but because the patent agent was held not to have expertise in the relevant area. His expertise related to the construction of patents. He was not a workman skilled in the relevant art. Therefore his evidence on the issue of obviousness was rejected.
[44]
Counsel for the plaintiffs seeks to have paragraphs 8 to 17 inclusive of Mr. Finchman's affidavit excluded on the ground that he does not have the requisite expertise. I have examined those paragraphs carefully. Mr. Finchman does not put himself forward as a person skilled in the art of luggage making or luggage designing. The paragraphs merely describe, in a summary form, the prior art patents appended to the affidavit. Mr. Finchman's affidavit, in this respect, is being used as a vehicle to place the prior art patents before the court, without drawing any conclusions respecting obviousness therefrom. I think the paragraphs are admissible for this purpose.
(2)
file wrappers
[45]
The defendant sought to introduce both the Canadian and the United States file wrappers. Counsel for the plaintiffs objected to the admission of this evidence. In Eli Lilly & Company and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ]) my colleague Mr. Justice Pinard at pages 38-39 [of his reasons for judgment], dealt with the admissibility of such documents:
"... the remaining issue concerns the admissibility of evidence of U.S. patent application files or documents or correspondence related thereto. In the present case, we are concerned with three U.S. patent applications relating to Mr. Van B. Hostetler's invention and correspondence related thereto. In the present case, we are concerned with three U.S. patent applications relating to Mr. Van B. Hostetler's invention and correspondence related thereto. Without having to decide if some of those documents were properly filed in evidence, I maintain the plaintiff's objections to their admissibility. Indeed, I consider that there is no basis in Canadian law whereby a Canadian or foreign patent application file relating to the patent in issue can be admitted into evidence,
for the purpose of limiting the construction put on the clauses, or establishing misrepresentation or otherwise
. (underlining added)
" <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  be contrary to fundamental principles to allow the defendant to use statements made by the plaintiff's patent agent whether in the course of its prosecutions of its applications for its United States patents or, for that matter, in the course of its prosecution of its applications for the patents in suit
for the purpose of restricting the meaning of the words of the claims in suit and limiting the ambit of the invention defined in them
. And, since the prime purpose of counsel for the defendant in tendering the United States and Canadian file wrappers was to use statements said to be contained in them for the purpose submitted their admission for such purpose would be contrary to fundamental principles. I have no hesitation, therefore, in ruling that they were inadmissible.' (underlining added)
...
"Finally, my colleague Strayer, J., in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , stated, at pages 86 and 87:
'At the close of their case the defendants sought to put in certain questions and answers and exhibits from the examination for discovery of Francis R. Saunders, the representative of Amfac for the purposes of examination for discovery ... These questions and exhibits related to the prosecution of the applications for the Canadian patent and the equivalent U.S. patent. Counsel for the plaintiffs took the position that such material should not be admitted. After due consideration I ruled
that such materials were not admissible
. I came to this conclusion on the basis
that the construction of a patent is a matter of law
and must be based on the patent document itself, subject to the usual assistance of evidence concerning the meaning of technical terms, etc. ... In this case the apparent purpose of the introduction of these materials was to show that the plaintiffs were estopped from denying that certain features of the patent were its essential elements because of statements made with the authority of the plaintiff Amfac during the course of the prosecution of the patent applications. ...'" (underlining added)
[46]
In the present case, the defendant is not seeking to have the file wrappers admitted for the purpose of construing the terms of the patents. Rather, it is sought to introduce such evidence merely to show what prior art had been before the patent examiner and what had not. This, it is argued, is relevant to the presumption that the patent is valid. (s. 47, Patents Act.) Counsel for the defendant tendered the patent file wrappers in this case for the purpose of demonstrating that the United States examiner had had before him, the three patents specifically mentioned above (Kish, Krynoski and Davis) and had disallowed claims 28 to 31 of the patent. It was noted that the Canadian patent examiner did not have these three patents before him when the Canadian patent was issued. Thus, I am asked to consider this evidence when considering the strength of the case the defendant must make to rebut the s. 47 presumption.
[47]
In my view, the prior art which was before the patent examiner is relevant to the rebuttability of the presumption of validity. This is not a matter of the construction of the claims per se, on which issue the law is clear that the patent file is not relevant. However, to support the relevance of the files, for the purpose of proving what prior art was and what was not before the patent examiner, it seems to me there would have to be some evidence, attesting to the fact that all patents which had been considered by the examiner were indeed referred to in the file or were likely to have been referred to in the file. Without some such assurance or attestation, I do not see how the documents can support the conclusions purported to be drawn therefrom. What is more, in this case, the evidence, even if admissible, would carry little weight. While claims 28 to 31 of the patent were originally disallowed by the United States examiner, on reconsideration, they were allowed. Thus, the evidence carries little weight to demonstrate the conclusion sought to be drawn; subsequent events contradict that very conclusion. In my view, the evidence issue can be disposed of in this case by indicating that even if technically admissible, it carries little weight.
Conclusion
[48]
I have concluded that an interlocutory injunction should not issue in this case. While the plaintiffs might be said to have a serious question to be tried, in the words of Mr. Justice Owen in the Baie James case, supra, the existence of the rights they assert appears doubtful. This doubt arises because it seems more likely than not that the defendant's garment bags do not constitute a substantial infringement of the plaintiffs' patent: the way in which they accomplish the purpose of keeping garments from bunching in the bottom of the bag is a materially different variation on the plaintiffs' patent. Also, the defendant's locking trolley does not appear to infringe the plaintiffs' registered industrial design.
[49]
If the defendant is right, and there is a more or less prima facie rule against issuing interlocutory injunctions in patent cases, then I would consider this case to fall within an exception to that rule. The exception would exist by virtue of the fact that the economic life of the patented product, in this case, is likely to expire well before the issue of the patent's validity and infringement could be finally determined at trial. In any event, I prefer to adopt an analysis which does not rely on any such presumption. In my view, it would be appropriate to grant an interlocutory injunction in this case if the requirements for doing so were otherwise met.
[50]
The fact that doubt exists with respect to establishment of the plaintiffs' case, and the fact that it will be comparatively easier to calculate damages which the plaintiffs might suffer, should an interlocutory injunction be wrongly refused, than it would be to calculate the damages the defendant might suffer if the injunction were wrongly given, lead me to conclude that the order sought should not be granted.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/blk
Footnotes
1.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 278 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 274, 275 (Ont. H. Ct., Div. Ct.); Creations 2000  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 35 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 55-56 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 186-187 (F.C.T.D.).
2. The plaintiff Samsonite U.S. and the company American Tourister are equally strong in the United States market.
[End of document]