[1]
Jerome, A.C.J.
: This motion by the plaintiff to amend its statement of claim and for an order striking a portion of the statement of defence and counterclaim of the defendant Calgary Scale Services Ltd. came on for hearing at Ottawa, Ontario, on November 19, 1996, via videoconference.
Background
[2]
The plaintiff is the owner of Canadian Patent Number 2096761 for the invention of a mobile weighing system. The plaintiff claims that its patent has been infringed by the defendants. A joint statement of defence was filed by the defendants on November 7, 1995. The plaintiff brought an application before Nadon, J., for an order striking the defendants' statement of defence. The application was allowed in part. By order dated July 3, 1996, Nadon, J., ordered that paragraphs 4, 5, and 6 of the statement of defence be struck, that particulars be provided for paragraphs 7, 8, 9, and 10, and that the defendants be given until August 1, 1996 to amend their statement of defence. The defendants filed a reply to particulars and a statement of defence as amended on July 25, 1996. The defendant, Calgary Scale Services Ltd. filed a statement of defence on its own behalf on August 1, 1996. On September 3, 1996, the plaintiff filed separate replies in relation to the defences filed on July 25, 1996 and August 1, 1996.
Analysis
[3]
The plaintiff seeks to amend its statement of claim as follows:
"(i) To change the naming of the first defendant from 'MASSLOAD TECHNOLOGIES INC.' to 'MASSLOAD TECHNOLOGIES, a partnership and PRAIRIE SYSTEMS AND EQUIP. LTD. possibly c.o.b. as MASSLOAD TECHNOLOGIES';
"(ii) To change the naming of the second defendant from 'CALGARY SCALE SERVICES LTD.' to 'CALGARY SCALE SERVICES (1988) LTD. c.o.b. as CALGARY SCALE SERVICES LTD.';
"(iii) To amend paragraph 2 to state 'The defendant Massload Technologies (hereinafter referred to as "MASSLOAD") is registered as a business partnership and the defendant Prairie Systems and Equip. Ltd. (hereinafter referred to as "PRAIRIE SYSTEMS") is a business corporation both of which businesses operate from premises located at 301-47th Street East, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan. The defendant PRAIRIE SYSTEMS possibly sometimes carries on business as "MASSLOAD TECHNOLOGIES". The partners of the defendant MASSLOAD are directors and officers of the defendant PRAIRIE SYSTEMS. The plaintiff is not aware whether either or both of these defendants are responsible in law for the acts which are the subject of this action herein, but these defendants are so aware and the plaintiff claims against both of these defendants in respect thereof.';
"(iv) To amend paragraph 3 to state 'The defendant Calgary Scale Services (1988) Ltd. (hereinafter referred to as "CALGARY SCALE") is a business corporation having a place of business at 4429-6 Street East Calgary, Alberta. The defendant CALGARY SCALE sometimes carries on business as "Calgary Scale Services Ltd."';
"(v) To change paragraph 4 to refer, at line 1 thereof, to 'Canadian Patent No. 2,096,761 as corrected by Certificate of Correction dated 20 September, 1995'; and,
"(vi) To change the reference to 'the defendant MASSLOAD' to 'the defendants MASSLOAD and/or PRAIRIE SYSTEMS' together with other consequential amendments throughout the statement of claim; all pursuant to rules 420 and 425."
The plaintiff submits that the misnomer of the defendants was the result of mistake and that the pleadings should be amended in the interests of justice. The solicitor for the defendant, Massload Technologies Inc., submits that it has no objection to the inclusion of Prairie Systems Equip. Ltd. as a defendant, but that the addition of the partnership as a party would be unnecessary and improper. The solicitor for the defendant, Calgary Scale Services Ltd., submits that it has no objection to the relief sought by the plaintiff in paragraphs (ii) and (iv).
[4]
In my opinion, the appropriate parties to this cause of action are the corporate defendants, Prairie Systems and Equip. Ltd. and Calgary Scale Services (1988) Ltd. The plaintiff's statement of claim identifies no cause of action against the individual partners in Massload Technologies. As such, the plaintiff may amend its statement of claim to change the naming of the first defendant in the title of proceedings to Prairie Systems and Equip. Ltd., to state that Prairie Systems and Equip. Ltd. is a business corporation which operates from premises located at 301-47th Street East, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, and to change all references to Massload Technologies to Prairie Systems and Equip. Ltd. The amendments to the statement of claim sought by the plaintiff in paragraphs (ii) and (iv), pertaining to the defendant Calgary Scale Services (1988) Ltd., and in paragraph (v), pertaining to the Certificate of Correction, are also allowed.
[5]
The plaintiff seeks an order:
"Striking out the defendant Calgary Scale Services Ltd.'s Counterclaim on the ground that it discloses no reasonable cause of action and, in the alternative, requiring the said defendant to file and serve particulars of the allegations of paragraph 15 of the statement of defence and counterclaim pursuant to rule 419."
Paragraph 15 of the defendant Calgary Scale Services Ltd.'s statement of defence and counterclaim states:
"15. Canadian Letters Patent No. 2,096,761 are and always have been invalid and void in that:
(a) The alleged invention was not novel, in that the subject matter of claims 1 through 9 of the subject patent and the means described therein were matters of common general knowledge since at least as early as 1992."
As I indicated orally at the close of argument, I do not consider this to be an appropriate case for striking the defendant Calgary Scale Services Ltd.'s counterclaim. The counterclaim discloses a cause of action relating to the validity of the patent. As an alternative to striking, the plaintiff seeks an order for particulars. As McNair, J., stated in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  party to know the case of his adversary so as to avoid surprise. ... Courts have drawn a distinction between particulars required before pleading and those required before trial. The purpose of particulars required to be delivered before pleading is for the intelligent pleading by the opposite party. As to particulars before trial, a party is generally entitled to any particulars required to properly prepare his case for trial."
I do not consider this to be an appropriate case for an order for particulars. The plaintiff is aware that the defendant Calgary Scale Services Ltd. is claiming that the invention was common knowledge which was generally known and accepted by those engaged in the particular art. I find the comments of Rouleau, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  to be applicable in this case:
"Following discovery, should the plaintiff still be at difficulty to adequately prepare for trial, there is nothing to prevent it from bringing a further demand for particulars if it still feels it necessary."
[6]
The defendants Prairie Systems and Equip. Ltd. and Calgary Scale Services (1988) Ltd. will have 10 days from the date of receipt of the plaintiff's amended statement of claim to file and serve any pleadings in response.
Application allowed in part.
Editor: Jocelyne M. Caissie/klf
[End of document]