Background
[1]
Teitelbaum, J
: This is an application for judicial review of a negative decision of the Convention Refugee Determination Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board (the "Board") dated November 7, 1994 and communicated to the applicant on November 11, 1994, refusing the applicant's claim for Convention refugee status. In its reasons, the Board determined that the applicant was excluded from making a claim to be a Convention refugee as defined in s. 2(1) of the
Immigration Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2, and the Schedule thereto (the "
Act
"), pursuant to the application of ss. E and F of the Schedule to the
Act
.
[2]
The grounds for the application are:
"1. that the decision is patently unreasonable having regard to the evidence properly before the tribunal so as to amount to an error of law;
"2. that the tribunal ignored evidence and misinterpreted evidence including testimony and documentary evidence;
"3. that the tribunal erred in law in misinterpreting and misapplying the definition of Convention Refugee as set out in s. 2(1) of the
Immigration Act
."
[3]
The relief sought is that the Board's decision be set aside and referred back to a differently constituted panel of the Board with directions.
Facts
[4]
The applicant, Pasha Shamlou, is a citizen of Iran. He left Iran in 1970 to pursue studies in radiation technology in the U.S. The applicant lived in the United States from 1970 to 1976. In 1972, the applicant married his first wife (an American) and obtained his "green card". He divorced her shortly thereafter. The applicant and his family in Iran were loyal supporters of the Shah and the Shah's Imperial government. During the period 1970 to 1976, the applicant claims he reported to SAVAK, the intelligence service of the Shah, on the activities of various dissident Iranian student groups throughout the United States.
[5]
The applicant left the United States for El Salvador on March 11, 1976 as a condition of parole imposed by a judge of a Florida Court. The applicant had been charged with attempted sexual battery and had pled guilty. The applicant claims that he pled guilty in order to avoid detection by anti-monarchist groups in the United States. The sentence imposed was 10-years' probation on the condition that the applicant leave the United States. The applicant claims that he did not understand the ramifications of a guilty plea, despite representation by legal counsel.
[6]
I do not accept this submission of the applicant. The applicant is a well-educated individual and knows well what he is doing.
[7]
The applicant went to El Salvador because his second wife was from El Salvador. After six months, the applicant's wife obtained a posting at the El Salvadorean Embassy in Mexico City and they moved to Mexico. The applicant moved from El Salvador to Mexico on May 12, 1976; from Mexico City to San Jose, Costa Rica on January 7, 1980; from San Jose to Panama City on January 15, 1980; from Panama City to Costa Rica on January 22, 1980; from Costa Rica to Mexico City in March of 1980; from Mexico to the United States in April 1986; and from the United States to Canada in February of 1992. (The decision of the Immigration and Refugee Board (Immigration Division) states that Mr. Shamlou was refused re-entry to the United States on February 8, 1993, at which point he made a claim for refugee status in Canada.) Upon his arrival in Canada, Mr. Shamlou had an Iranian passport, a Mexican travel document, and a Costa Rican Document of Identity and Travel. His U.S. "green card" had been confiscated by U.S. Immigration officials.
[8]
The applicant was in Mexico on a student visa from 1976 to 1979. Through his acquaintance with the Mexican Secretary of the Interior, he was able to obtain a Travel and Identity Document which allowed him to leave and re-enter Mexico. This document was issued in 1986 and expired in 1991. The applicant indicated to the Board that he renewed the Travel and Identity Document twice, once in 1987 and once in 1988. The 1988 Visa stated that "[a]dmission is subject to the final decision of the Immigration and Health authorities." In 1979, Mr. Shamlou received a letter from the United Nations Development Program stating that he is a refugee under the Mandate of the High Commissioner of the United Nations for Refugees. Mr. Shamlou states that this document was obtained through his personal connections and that he has never used it to obtain any type of status in Mexico or any other country.
[9]
The respondent relies on the facts as set out in the Reasons of the Refugee Division and underlines the following information in its Further Memorandum of Argument, paragraph 4:
"(l) in 1980, he [the applicant] received a work permit to work in Mexico for one year which was renewed four times, without difficulty;"
Record
, pp. 448 to 450
"(m) after four successive renewals of his work permit (in or about 1984), he was issued a document recognizing him as a permanent resident of Mexico;"
Record
, pp. 20, 444, 445
"(n) he was not required to renew his permanent resident status though he suggested that he would lose his status if he was out of Mexico for more than three years. He was unaware of the process to re-apply for renewal;"
Record
, pp. 451-453
"(o) during his 10 years of residence in Mexico, there was never any attempt made by the Mexican authorities to deport him to Iran;"
Record
, p. 452
"(p) there were no restrictions on his movement within Mexico and he was able to leave and return to Mexico without difficulty;"
Record
, pp. 445 to 446 and 451
"(q) he was not prevented from doing anything in Mexico other than vote;"
Record
, p. 461
"(r) while preference was given in certain areas to Mexican nationals, he had no problems in Mexico;"
Record
, pp. 461 to 461
"(s) he had health coverage in Mexico;"
Record
, p. 455
"(t) he owned property and payed (sic) taxes in Mexico;"
Record
, p. 452
"(u) he was initially employed by a University in Mexico. He voluntarily left his employment and joined the Bank of Mexico. Then, he worked for a hotel organization;"
Record
, p. 501
"(v) in 1985, he applied for Mexican citizenship. He was requested to provide some documentation. He did not do so because he left for the United Sates (sic) in April, 1986."
Record
, pp. 454, 461
"(w) in April, 1986, he used his United States green card to enter the United States;"
Record
, pp. 20 and 446
"(x) he left Mexico for the United States, voluntarily, in order to eventually visit his father in Turkey;"
Record
, p. 456
"(y) he did not visit Turkey; instead, he stayed in Los Angeles until 1989, and then in New York City and Maryland, until 1993;"
Record
, p. 456
"(z) in 1987, while living in the United States, he obtained a new Iranian passport for $1,000;"
Record
, p. 462
"(aa) in 1992, he renewed his Iranian passport by paying a bribe;"
Record
[Application Record], pp. 463 to 465
"(ab) the applicant further testified that he obtained without difficulty, thousands of Costa Rican travel documents for other Iranian nationals through bribery;"
Record
, pp. 467 to 468
"(ac) he also obtained for himself a Costa Rican travel document which permitted him to enter and leave the country unconditionally. He used the Costa Rican travel document to travel to Panama;"
Record
, pp. 84 to 91, 467 and 470
"(ad) in February 1993, he arrived in Canada with his Iranian passport, Mexican travel document, Costa Rican travel document and U.S. green card;"
Record
, p. 361
"(ae) when he attempted to return to the United States, he was denied re-entry because the U.S. authorities discovered his various travel documents including his Iranian passport;"
Record
, p. 477
"(af) in response to questions by a Canadian Immigration Official at the Canada-U.S. boarder (sic), and in his personal information form which was completed immediately prior to the commencement of the refugee hearing, he denied having any criminal convictions;"
Record
, pp. 20 and 199
"(ag) in the addendum to his Personal Information form, which he adopted at the commencement of his refugee hearing, he indicated that his claim was based on political activity (his opposition to the present government of Iran) and his religion (Sufism). At a subsequent sitting of the Refugee Division, he amended his claim to include fear of persecution based on his practising Catholicism for several years, and continuing to do so."
Record
, pp. 28 and 438
"
Issues
[10]
In essence, the applicant raises three issues:
1. Error of law: The Board erred in excluding the applicant from making a claim to be a Convention refugee pursuant to articles 1E and 1F(b) of the 1951 United Nations
Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees
incorporated into the
Act
as a schedule.
2. Erroneous finding of fact: The Board made a number of errors in reciting the facts as adduced through oral testimony and documentary evidence.
3. Failure to provide complete reasons: The Board failed to provide complete reasons for its decision.
[11]
The respondent, in its Further Memorandum of Argument, filed at the Registry on October 17, 1995, raises only one issue at para. 8:
"It is submitted that the Refugee Division did not err in law in determining that the applicant was excluded from the definition of Convention refugee status."
[12]
I am satisfied that the real issue before me is whether the Board erred in its application of the schedule to the
Act
in excluding the applicant from Convention refugee status. The issue of failing to provide complete reasons is a non issue.
The Board's Decision
[13]
In its decision of October 20, 1994, the Board stated the applicant's prior Mexican status allowed for his right to return to Mexico. The Board noted that there was no credible or trustworthy evidence adduced as to why the applicant did not renew his Mexican travel and identity document or to contradict his opinion that he would lose his status in Mexico if he remained outside the country for three years. The Board found that the applicant bore the responsibility and obligation to maintain the status granted to him by the Mexican government and failed to do so. Further, the Board found that the applicant was
"a person recognized by the competent authorities of Mexico as having most of the rights and obligations which are attached to the possession of the nationality of that country. He resided in Mexico from 1976 to 1986. His 10 year stay was for a specific, limited purpose, but was of an indefinite duration as evidenced by his employment, acquisition of property and application for citizenship. The claimant did not allege any persecution on the part of the Mexican government and at no time did they attempt to return him to Iran." (Board's decision, paragraph 39)
[14]
The Board found that the applicant fell within the purview of s. E of art. 1 of the 1951
Convention
and that he was excluded from Convention refugee status.
[15]
The respondent's Further Memorandum of Argument identifies the facts on which the Board based its decision at paragraph 5:
"5. The Refugee Division found that the applicant is a person recognized by the competent authorities of Mexico as having most of the rights and obligations which are attached to the possession of the nationality of that country. The only restriction on the applicant as a mandate refugee and as a permanent resident was his inability to vote. He was free to leave, re-enter and reside anywhere in Mexico. He had access to free health care, and acquired property. He changed his employer on several occasions without any hinderance. The applicant also did not allege that he was ever subject to any persecution by the Mexican authorities, nor did they at any time attempt to return him to Iran. There was no credible or trustworthy evidence as to why he did not renew his Mexican travel and identity documents. Accordingly, the Refugee Division found that the applicant fell within schedule E of Article 1 of the Convention and accordingly he was excluded from claiming Convention refugee status in Canada."
[16]
In the alternative, the Board found that the applicant was not a Convention refugee by virtue of s. F(b) of art. 1 of the 1951
Convention
. The Board referred to the United Nations'
Declaration of the Rights of the Child
, specifically principle 9, which states that the child shall be protected against all forms of neglect, cruelty and exploitation. The Board found that, since the applicant was charged and pleaded guilty to a crime of attempted sexual battery of an 11 year old boy, the crime was of a serious nature. The fact that the crime is of a serious nature is not denied. The panel found that the applicant had the benefit of counsel, had a reasonable knowledge of English in that he was undertaking a technical course in the English language and was an educated man. Further, the Board held that, despite the fact that the applicant had a political reason for pleading guilty, the crime the applicant was convicted of was nonpolitical and, as a result, the Board did not find his motive for pleading guilty relevant.
[17]
The respondents' Further Memorandum of Argument notes (at paragraphs 6 and 7):
"6. The Refugee Division further found that the applicant had committed a serious nonpolitical in the U.S.A. (sic). In 1979, he had pleaded guilty to attempted sexual battery of a 11 year old boy in the state of Florida, U.S.A., was convicted, placed on probation for 10 years on condition that he leave the country and never return, and immediately deported from the U.S.A. The Refugee Division, therefore, found that the applicant was excluded from claiming Convention refugee status under Article 1F(b) of the
Convention
.
"7. The Refugee Division also concluded that because the applicant was excluded from claiming Convention refugee status under s. E and subs. F(b) of Article 1 of the Convention, it was unnecessary to make findings with respect to whether the applicant was also excluded under Article 1F(a) of the
Convention
because of his involvement with the Iranian Secret Service Agency, SAVAK, or to consider the inclusionary aspects of his refugee claim."
Law
[18]
Section 2(1) of the
Immigration Act
states:
"'Convention' means the United Nations Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees signed at Geneva on July 28, 1951, and includes the Protocol thereto signed at New York City on January 31, 1967;
"'Convention refugee' means any person who
(a) by reason of a well-founded fear of persecution for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group or political opinion,
(i) is outside the country of the person's nationality and is unable or, by reason of that fear, is unwilling to avail himself of the protection of that country, or
(ii) not having a country of nationality, is outside the country of the person's former habitual residence and is unable or, by reason of that fear, is unwilling to return to that country, and
(b) has not ceased to be a Convention refugee by virtue of subs. (2), but does not include any person to whom the Convention does not apply pursuant to s. E or F of Article 1 thereof, which sections are set out in the schedule to this Act;"
[19]
The Schedule to the
Immigration Act
states:
"Sections E and F of Article 1 of the United Nations Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees
E. This Convention shall not apply to a person who is recognized by the competent authorities of the country in which he has taken residence as having the rights and obligations which are attached to the possession of the nationality of that country.
F. The provisions of this Convention shall not apply to any person with respect to whom there are serious reasons for considering that:
(a) he has committed a crime against peace, a war crime, or a crime against humanity, as defined in the international instruments drawn up to make provision in respect of such crimes;
(b) he has committed a serious nonpolitical crime outside the country of refuge prior to his admission to that country as a refugee;
(c) he has been guilty of acts contrary to the purposes and principles of the United Nations."
Analysis
1. Sections E And F Of
Article 1 Of The Convention
a) Article 1E
[20]
The applicant submits that, notwithstanding that he had been recognized as a mandate refugee by the United Nations High Commission for Refugees, any status or protection accorded him by the Mexican authorities was not as a result of his mandate refugee status, but rather a result of his personal influence with Mexican officials. The applicant notes that, despite the fact that he enjoyed many privileges as a resident of Mexico and that Mexican authorities did not make any attempt to remove him, he did not enjoy de facto nationality as defined by Professor Hathaway [see footnote 1]. There was no evidence before the Board that the applicant enjoyed "some form of guarantee against return to the country of persecution", that the applicant was "fully protected against deportation or expulsion", or that the rights of freedom of entry and freedom from removal were "clearly conferred and respected". The applicant submits that it was part of his sworn testimony before the Board that the Mexican Consulate-General had been contacted by telephone and was informed that if an individual is outside Mexico for more than a three-year period, s/he will lose whatever status s/he enjoyed in Mexico. (Oral testimony of the applicant, 8 June 1994) The applicant submits that, pursuant to the decision of the Federal Court of Appeal in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  presumed to be true, and that the Board erred in ignoring or not giving enough weight to the applicant's uncontradicted evidence regarding his loss of status in Mexico.
[21]
The Affidavit of Michelle Tse, a student-at-law with the Department of Justice, sworn on September 21, 1995, states that, in her review of both affidavits filed by the applicant, as well as her review of the documentation before the Refugee Division panel,
"there was no documentary or other expert evidence in support of the applicant's assertions with respect to his alleged loss of permanent residence status in Mexico, before the Refugee Division." (Affidavit of Michelle Tse, sworn 21 September 1995, para. 2)
[22]
She notes that she went with counsel for the Department of Justice, Mr. Viresh Fernando, on September 15, 1995, to the Office of the Consul in Mexico in Toronto, where they met with the Mexican Consul, Mr. Hipolito Santillan-Acosta. Ms. Tse deposes that Mr. Santillan-Acosta stated that his telephone discussions with applicant's counsel and applicant's counsel's secretary were of a general nature and not specific to the applicant's position in Mexico. The affidavit states the following with respect to the law of Mexico regarding immigration:
"7. Mr. Santillan-Acosta stated that 'Estatuto Legal De Los Extranjeros', an excerpt of which is attached as exhibit 'B' to the Supplementary Affidavit of the applicant, is a private publication containing various Mexican laws, regulations and legal commentary with respect to non-citizens of Mexico. It is not an official version of the Mexican statutes. ...
"8. Mr. Santillan-Acosta also stated that Article 56 of the 'Estatuto Legal De Los Extranjeros' is not fully determinative of a landed immigrant's status even though he/she may have been out of Mexico for more than three consecutive years or for five years in a period of 10 years, for at least two reasons.
"9. Firstly, Mr. Santillan-Acosta, stated that a refugee or landed immigrant may in fact return to Mexico with expired documents and will be granted re-entry. Upon entry and presentation of expired documents, the Mexican authorities would make an appointment with that person for an interview to determine whether the documents can be renewed. A fine may be imposed as result of expiration of the permit.
"10. Mr. Santillan-Acosta noted that there may be other Articles and Regulations which vary, minimize, or even negate the impact of Article 56.
"11. Mr. Santillan-Acosta indicated that he therefore could not state that persons who appear to fall within Article 56 would have automatically lost their landed immigrant status by merely being outside Mexico for more than a certain period of time. This would have to be determined by Mexican authorities on the particular facts of the case. Mr. Santillan-Acosta specifically noted that a conclusion in this regard can not be made in the abstract."
[23]
The applicant further submits that the Board erred in its interpretation and application of the decision of Madame Justice McGillis in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  stated:
" <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  claimant has a right of return to the country in question.
"The panel finds that the claimant's prior Mexican status allowed for his right of return to Mexico."
[24]
The applicant submits that, since Mexico is not a signatory to the
Convention
, it is under no legal obligation to entertain a refugee claim or provide other protection to the applicant. The applicant notes that, in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , Madame Justice McGillis stated:
"... I am of the opinion that this Article [1E] does not apply on the facts of this case. The applicants, one of whom is Jewish, lost their USSR citizenship when they emigrated to Israel in 1990. Although the applicants now have the right to re-apply for citizenship in Ukraine, their applications would be dealt with on a 'case-by-case' basis. It is not therefore clear that the applicants would be able to return to Ukraine. Accordingly, on the facts of this case, the Article would not appear to apply."
[25]
The applicant submits that the Board is obliged to make decisions with respect to refugee claims based on conditions as they currently, or prospectively may, exist. In the case at bar, the applicant states that the Board incorrectly based its decision with respect to the application of Article 1E on conditions as they previously existed.
[26]
The Board stated that:
"For reasons of his own, the claimant chose not to renew his Mexican travel documents or to wait for his Mexican citizenship status to be formalized as it appears his obvious preference was to live in the USA."
[27]
The applicant submits that the fact that Mr. Shamlou did not renew his Mexican documents while in the United States should not weigh against the applicant in this matter. The evidence before the Board indicated that Mr. Shamlou no longer felt that it was necessary to renew these documents once he had returned to the United States as he felt that his status in the United States afforded him the protection he required. The applicant further submits that it should not weigh against Mr. Shamlou that he did not proceed with a refugee claim while in the United States. His status there was obtained because of his marriage to an American citizen. The fact that Mr. Shamlou did not look to either Mexico or the United States for protection as a refugee does not mean that he is not a refugee; it is merely evidence that he had other options available to him to obtain status in those countries and he was not required to invoke the ultimate protection of making a refugee claim.
[28]
The United Nations
Handbook on Procedures and Criteria for Determining Refugee Status
[see footnote 3] states:
"144. This provision relates to persons who might otherwise qualify for refugee status and who have been received in a country where they have been granted most of the rights normally enjoyed by nationals, but not formal citizenship. (They are frequently referred to as 'national refugees'.) The country that has received them is frequently one where the population is of the same ethnic origin as themselves. [Footnote: In elaborating this exclusion clause, the drafters of the Convention had principally in mind refugees of German extraction having arrived in the Federal Republic of Germany who were recognized as possessing the rights and obligations attaching to German nationality.]
"145. There is no precise definition of 'rights and obligations' that would constitute a reason for exclusion under this clause. It may, however, be said that the exclusion operates if a person's status is largely assimilated to that of a national of the country. In particular he must, like a national, be fully protected against deportation or expulsion.
"146. The clause refers to a person who has 'taken residence' in the country concerned. This implies continued residence and not a mere visit. A person who resides outside the country and does not enjoy the diplomatic protection of that country is not affected by the exclusion clause."
[29]
Lorne Waldman, in
Immigration Law and Practice
, vol. 1, submits that:
"... [A] person should be excluded from the Convention based upon Art. 1E only in circumstances where it is clear that the person has obtained all of the most fundamental basic rights associated with nationality of a country. Although it is not possible to make an exhaustive list of all the rights, these would include, at minimum, the right to return, the right to reside for an unlimited period of time, the right to study, the right to work, and access to basic social services." [see footnote 4]
[30]
In support of this proposition, Waldman cites
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), per Gibson, J., [see footnote 5], where the court held that, since the applicant in that case did not have the right to return to the United States at the time of the hearing, the applicant did not possess all of the rights accorded a U.S. national. The respondent agrees with the proposition that in order to be excluded pursuant to Article 1E, one must enjoy the right not to be excluded from the country or state. The respondent, however, distinguishes
Mahdi
from the case at bar. In
Mahdi
, the court allowed the application for judicial review because the Board had specifically failed to asses the applicant's right to return to the United States. The respondent maintains that the applicant still has the right to return to Mexico.
[31]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), the court held that the Board did not err in its application of s. 1E. The applicant, a citizen of the former U.S.S.R. and of Russia, had resided in Estonia. The Board found that he was a resident of Estonia and, given the rights that the applicant had in Estonia, found that the applicant was excluded from protection under the Convention. The applicant had received the basic rights that Estonian nationals have and therefore the Board had not erred in applying the exclusion clause. The respondent cites this case for the proposition that there is no legal obligation for a Board to consider or to determine whether a claimant might be included in the definition. [see footnote 6]
[32]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), the court ruled that Article 1E did not apply to exclude the claimant from refugee status. In that case, the claimant was a Polish national who was claiming refugee status against Poland. He had resided legally in West Germany for four years before coming to Canada. Since the claimant was only able to stay in West Germany by virtue of temporary visas, had been unable to obtain permanent resident status and was threatened with deportation as his visa was not to be renewed, it could not be said that the claimant had been recognized by West Germany as having the rights and obligations attached to the possession of West German nationality. In the case at bar, the respondent submits that, by his own admission, the applicant did not have mere temporary status in Mexico. By his own admission, he had obtained permanent residence and had even gone so far as to apply for Mexican citizenship.
[33]
The essence of the respondent's argument is that, on the evidence before it, it was reasonably open for the Board to conclude that the applicant was a person recognized by the competent authorities in Mexico as having most of the rights and obligations which attach to the possession of nationality in Mexico, including the ability to leave, re-enter, to reside anywhere in the country, the right to education, access to free health care, the right to purchase and own property, the responsibility to pay taxes, and the ability to seek, obtain and change employment.
[34]
The respondent submits that the comments of Urie, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (C.A.), are relevant to the case at bar. In that case, the applicant had already been granted Convention refugee status by France, a signatory to the
Convention
(Mexico is not a signatory to the
Convention
). In that case, the Court of Appeal noted:
"... [T]he applicant as a refugee admitted to France can return at least as long as his travel permit, issued by that country to him, is valid. ... Since he can return to France, which is not the country of his nationality, or where his life or freedom would be threatened, there is no obligation on the Minister to permit him to remain in Canada. In my view, therefore, applicant counsel's submission that the determination by the Minister that his client was a Convention refugee gave him the right to remain in Canada must fail." (p. 264)
[35]
Lorne Waldman in his text submits that Boards should apply Article 1E with "great caution". He outlines four criteria that, in his opinion, the Board should follow in undertaking an analysis regarding the "basic rights" enjoyed by an applicant. These four criteria are:
(a) the right to return to the country of residence;
(b) the right to work freely without restrictions;
(c) the right to study, and
(d) full access to social services in the country of residence.
If the applicant has some sort of temporary status which must be renewed, and which could be cancelled, or if the applicant does not have the right to return to the country of residence, clearly the applicant should not be excluded under Art. 1E" (emphasis added) [see footnote 7]
[36]
I accept the criteria outlined by Mr. Waldman as an accurate statement of the law. The issue with respect to the Board's application then really turns on whether or not it was reasonably open for the Board, on the facts before it, to conclude that the applicant was a person recognized by the competent authorities in Mexico as having most of the rights and obligations which are attached to a person of that nationality. The Board noted in its Decision that the applicant's prior status in Mexico allowed for the applicant's right of return to Mexico, yet the applicant's testimony before the Board and the applicant's evidence regarding the telephone call to the Mexican Consulate and its interpretation of Mexican law to mean that the applicant lost his status if his Travel and Identity Document were not renewed indicates that the applicant did not really enjoy the "basic rights" accorded to a national of Mexico. The subsequent meeting of Department of Justice counsel with the Mexican Consul indicates that the applicant may have been incorrect in his assessment of his refugee status. This evidence, however, was not before the Board when it made its determination, and I therefore cannot take this into account in rendering my decision. The issue is whether the Board came to a conclusion that was reasonably open for it to make based on the facts before it. I am satisfied that the conclusion that the Board came to, in determining that the applicant enjoyed substantially the same rights as Mexican nationals, was one that was reasonably open to it to make on the facts before it and that the Board did not, with respect to this issue, base its decision on an erroneous finding of fact that it made in a perverse or capricious manner or without regard for the material before it.
b) Article 1F(b)
[37]
The applicant submits that the Board erred in its application of Article 1F(b) in its failure to balance the gravity of the crime the applicant was convicted of in the United States with the severity of the persecution to which the applicant may be subjected if returned to Iran. This suggests that the Board should have first considered the applicant's claim for refugee status against the crime which the applicant was alleged to have committed in the United States. If the severity of the potential persecution outweighs the crime committed, then the applicant should not be excluded under Article 1F(b).
[38]
There appears to be two schools of judicial thought with respect to this submission. One branch of jurisprudence holds that no "balancing" of potential persecution against the crime need take place and the second (supported by academics writing in the area of refugee law) holds that a balancing should take place. The United Nations
Handbook
indicates that the exclusion clauses should be interpreted restrictively. Further, the
Handbook
states specifically that a Contracting State should "balance" the nature of the offence presumed to have been committed by the applicant and the degree of persecution feared.
[39]
The relevant paragraphs of the
Handbook
state:
"149. The competence to decide whether any of these exclusion clauses are applicable is incumbent upon the Contracting State in whose territory the applicant seeks recognition of his refugee status. For these clauses to apply, it is sufficient to establish that there are 'serious reasons for considering' that one of the acts described has been committed. Formal proof of previous penal prosecution is not required. Considering the serious consequences of exclusion for the person concerned, however, the interpretation of these exclusion clauses must be restrictive.
. . . . .
151. The aim of this exclusion clause [1F(b)] is to protect the community of a receiving country from the danger of admitting a refugee who has committed a serious common crime. It also seeks to render due justice to a refugee who has committed a common crime (or crimes) of a less serious nature or has committed a political offence.
. . . . .
"155. What constitutes a 'serious' nonpolitical crime for the purposes of this exclusion clause is difficult to define, especially since the term 'crime' has different connotations in different legal systems. In some countries the word 'crime' denotes only offences of a serious character. In other countries it may comprise anything from petty larceny to murder. In the present context, however, a 'serious' crime must be a capital crime or a very grave punishable act. Minor offences punishable by moderate sentences are not grounds for exclusion under Article 1 F (b) even if technically referred to as 'crimes' in the penal law of the country concerned.
"156. In applying this exclusion clause, it is also necessary to strike a balance between the nature of the offence presumed to have been committed by the applicant and the degree of persecution feared. If a person has well-founded fear of very severe persecution, e.g. persecution endangering his life or freedom, a crime must be very grave in order to exclude him. If the persecution feared is less serious, it will be necessary to have regard to the nature of the crime or crimes presumed to have been committed in order to establish whether the applicant is not in reality a fugitive from justice or whether his criminal character does not outweigh his character as a bona fide refugee.
"157. In evaluating the nature of the crime presumed to have been committed, all the relevant factors - including any mitigating circumstances - must be taken into account. ... The fact that an applicant convicted of a serious nonpolitical crime has already served his sentence or has been granted a pardon or has benefited from an amnesty is also relevant. In the latter case, there is a presumption that the exclusion clause is no longer applicable, unless it can be shown that, despite the pardon or amnesty, the applicant's criminal character still predominates."
[40]
The respondent maintains that paragraphs 140, 141, 147 and 149 of the
Handbook
indicate that there is no legal obligation on the Board to consider or determine whether a claimant might be included in the definition but for the fact that there are serious reasons for considering that he has committed a crime against humanity. With all due respect, I do not take these paragraphs to mean the same thing the respondent takes them to mean. The relevant paragraphs read:
"140. The 1951 Convention, in ss. D, E and F of Article 1, contains provisions whereby persons otherwise having the characteristics of refugees, as defined in Article 1, s. A, are excluded from refugee status. Such persons fall into three groups. The first group (Article 1 D) consists of persons already receiving United Nations protection or assistance; the second group (Article 1 E) deals with persons who are not considered to be in need of international protection; and the third group (Article 1 F) enumerates the categories of persons who are not considered to be deserving of international protection.
"141. Normally it will be during the process of determining a person's refugee status that the facts leading to exclusion under these clauses will emerge. It may, however, also happen that facts justifying exclusion will become known only after a person has been recognized as a refugee. In such cases, the exclusion clause will call for a cancellation of the decision previously taken.
[Paragraphs 147 and 149 deal with Article 1 F of the 1951
Convention
]
"147. The pre-war international instruments that defined various categories of refugees contained no provisions for the exclusion of criminals. It was immediately after the Second World War that for the first time special provisions were drawn up to exclude from the large group of then assisted refugees certain persons who were deemed unworthy of international protection.
. . . . .
"149. The competence to decide whether any of these exclusion clauses are applicable is incumbent upon the Contracting State in whose territory the applicant seeks recognition of his refugee status. For these clauses to apply, it is sufficient to establish that there are 'serious reasons for considering' that one of the acts described has been committed. Formal proof of previous penal prosecution is not required. Considering the serious consequences of exclusion for the person concerned, however, the interpretation of these exclusion clauses must be restrictive."
[41]
The line of case-law which holds that no weighing of inclusion and exclusion under Article 1F(b) appears to begin with the case of <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> in 1992.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), the Court of Appeal favoured a wide power of exclusion under Article 1F, despite the fact that several international authorities suggested a restrictive interpretation of the clause.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R.(2d) 229 (F.C.A.), a 1994 case, the Court of Appeal held that it is not incumbent upon the Immigration and Refugee Board to address issues of inclusion where a claimant is described in an exclusion clause, and hence there is no obligation to balance the risk of persecution and his or her criminal character.
[42]
A most recent "no balancing" case to be considered is the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), the first Canadian case to consider the interpretation of the words "nonpolitical" in Article 1F(b). In that case, an Iranian citizen had been excluded by the Board for having committed bombings in Iran. The applicant argued (unsuccessfully) that these were political in nature and, as a result, took him out of the ambit of Article 1F(b). Mr Justice Hugessen, in drawing an analogy to extradition clauses stated:
"... Another panel of this court has already rejected the suggestion made by a number of authors that Article 1F(a) requires a kind of proportionality test which would weigh the persecution likely to be suffered by the refugee claimant against the gravity of his crime. Whether or not such a test may be appropriate for Article 1F(b) seems to me to be even more problematical. As I have already indicated, the claimant to whom the exclusion clause applies is ex hypothesi in danger of persecution; the crime which he has committed is by definition 'serious' and will therefore carry with it a heavy penalty ... This country is apparently prepared to extradite criminals to face the death penalty and, at least for a crime of the nature of that which the appellant has admitted committing, I can see no reason why we should take any different attitude to a refugee claimant. It is not in the public interest that this country should become a safe haven for mass bombers.
"Where it is appropriate to use a proportionality test under Article 1F(b) is in the weighing of the gravity of the crime as part of the process of determining if we should brand it as 'political'. A very serious crime, such as murder, may be accepted as political if the regime against which it is committed is repressive and offers no scope for freedom of expression and the peaceful change of government or government policy. Under such a regime the claimant might be found to have had no other option to bring about political change." (pp. 534-535)
[43]
The line of cases that argues that the court should undertake a balancing between the gravity of the crime and the risk of persecution is of less judicial weight. The applicant cites
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (hereinafter
Ward
), in support of the proposition that a criminal past should not be a reason to estop a claimant from obtaining refugee status. [see footnote 8] In
Ministre de l'Emploi et de l' <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), a 1992 decision, the Federal Court of Appeal held that the application of an exclusion clause to a particular claimant is never automatic and will always require an assessment of the circumstances and the situation as a whole - including the question of inclusion in Article 1 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R.(2d) 244 (T.D.), a decision of Jerome, A.C.J., the court noted that once the Immigration and Refugee Board finds that a claimant has a well-founded fear of persecution, it must be extremely cautious - in light of the potential danger faced by the claimant - in its application of the exclusion clause.
[44]
A recent statement of the Trial Division on this point is the decision of Mr. Justice Gibson in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), where he held that the Board must weigh or balance the inclusion and exclusion aspects under Article 1F(b). Mr. Justice Gibson noted:
"... [I]f it was clear that the applicant would leave Canada to return to the United States rather than return to Lebanon, I would conclude that the CRDD made no error in failing to consider the applicant's Convention refugee status in respect of Lebanon. ... It is conceivable that what might, in abstract, be considered a serious nonpolitical crime in respect of this applicant might not in relative terms be considered so 'serious' when weighed against the risk that return of the applicant to Lebanon might present.
"... I conclude that the CRDD erred in law in failing to consider the applicant's Convention refugee claim as against Lebanon and in failing to balance the risk to the applicant that would flow from his return to Lebanon by reason of the exclusion clause against the seriousness of the serious nonpolitical crimes here at issue. Having conducted that balancing, the CRDD would have then been in a position to determine whether the serious nonpolitical crimes were of such a nature as to warrant the application of the exclusion clause and the imposition on the applicant of the risk that would flow from his return to Lebanon." (pp. 556-557)
[45]
In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , it was held that the risk to the applicant that would flow from his country of origin should be balanced against the seriousness of the "serious nonpolitical crime". The respondent distinguishes this case by suggesting that it was decided before the court had the benefit of the Court of Appeal's decision in
Gil
and that I am bound by the
Gil
decision.
[46]
In the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , A-19-95, November 9, 1995, Mr. Justice Hugessen, once again stated, as he did in
Gil
, that no balancing is required if it is determined that the applicant committed a serious nonpolitical crime.
[47]
The applicant submits that <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> is distinguishable on its facts. In that case, the appellant, a member of the Nicaraguan Patriotic Military Service, had, inter alia, participated in the killing of people. He was found by the Board to be excluded from the definition of Convention refugee by reason of Article 1F(a). The applicant further submits that, although the Court of Appeal appears to have precluded a balancing argument with respect to crimes which engage Article 1F(a), it has not specifically done so with respect to those which engage Article 1F(b). Mahoney, J.A., stated in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> :
"Can crimes committed in the prosecution or suppression of a revolution be characterized as 'nonpolitical'? I doubt it. Perhaps the modifier 'serious' in 1F(b) would make possible the balancing suggested but there is no room for it in 1F(a).
. . . . .
"I find nothing in the
Act
that would permit the Refugee Division to weigh the severity of potential persecution against the gravity of the conduct which has led it to conclude that what was done was an Article 1F(a) crime." ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, at pp. 237-238)
[48]
The applicant submits that this view accords with the weight of academic authority with respect to Article 1F. Lorne Waldman neatly summarizes the discussion:
"In the context of Article 1F(b), it is submitted that the serious consequences of exclusion demand that the gravity of the offence committed by the claimant be weighed against the consequences, to him or her, of
refoulement
. Goodwin-Gill expresses this principle as follows:
'... In practice, the claim to be a refugee can rarely be ignored, for a balance must also be struck between the nature of the offence presumed to have been committed and the degree of persecution feared. ...'
"Grahl-Madsen is of the opinion that a risk of especially severe persecution may outweigh the factor of criminality and negate the exclusion clause:
'[I]f, for political reasons, a person is threatened with certain death, imprisonment for life, serious bodily harm or the like upon his eventual return to his country of origin; it would, indeed, seem equitable to recognized him as a refugee, even if he were considered guilty of a truly serious nonpolitical crime. ...'" (
Waldman
, supra, ยง8.274-8.275, at p. 8:245)
[49]
I am in total agreement with Mr. Justice Hugessen when he states in the
Gil
case and the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case that the proportionality (or balancing) test under article 1F(b) is in the weighing of the gravity of the crime in order to determine if the crime can be considered or be branded as a political crime and not in the "weighing" or "balancing" of the seriousness of the nonpolitical crime as against what may happen to the refugee applicant if s/he were returned to the country where the applicant alleges fear of persecution.
[50]
I believe that if Mr. Justice Gibson had had the benefit of the decision of Mr. Justice Hugessen, he too would have concluded that there is to be no "balancing" assuming it is clear that the crime could not be considered as political. In the case at bar, there is nothing to indicate that the crime to which the applicant pled guilty is of a political nature.
[51]
I am therefore satisfied that the Board did not err in law in not weighing the persecution the applicant may be subject to as against the gravity of his crime. I might add that the crime committed by the applicant is a very serious one.
[52]
I believe that the decision of the Board is a valid one and I am satisfied that there is no erroneous finding of fact that would warrant me to interfere with the Board's decision. I am also satisfied that the Board's reasons are sufficiently complete.
[53]
Therefore, the application for judicial review is denied.
[54]
The applicant has filed three questions to be certified. They are:
1. If an individual has the protection of and enjoys most of the rights and obligations attached to nationality of country "A", but allows his or her immigration status to lapse in country "A" under the mistaken belief that he or she could also enjoy similarly adequate protection in country "B", but ultimately it is determined that he or she is not legally entitled to protection in country "B", does that individual come within the ambit of the exclusion clause contained in Article 1E of the
Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees
, and is that individual thereby precluded from making a claim to be a Convention refugee in Canada?
2. If an individual once had a right to enter and remain in another country, but no longer has an unequivocal right to return to or remain in that or any other country, does that individual fall within the ambit of Article 1E?
3. Once "serious grounds for considering" that an individual has committed a serious nonpolitical crime outside the country of refuge have been established, should it not be necessary to consider other factors, such as: the gravity of the crime in comparison to the severity of the consequences of returning an individual to the country in which he or she fears persecution; length of time since the conviction for the crime; completion of the sentence imposed; rehabilitation of the claimant; the granting of a pardon; or any other relevant or mitigating factor to determine whether Article 1F(b) is applicable to that particular individual?
[55]
The respondent submits that the questions proposed by the applicant are not serious questions of general importance that would be determinative of the application for judicial review.
[56]
I am in agreement with counsel for the respondent. I am satisfied that the decision of Mr. Justice Hugessen in the
Gil
case (supra) and the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case (supra) has decided the issue of "balancing".
[57]
As I have stated, I am satisfied that both the
Gil
case (supra) and the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case (supra) clearly stands for the principle that once it is determined that the applicant has committed "a serious nonpolitical crime" it is not necessary to consider other factors such as the gravity of the crime in comparison to the severity of the consequences of returning an individual to the country in which he or she fears persecution.
[58]
The "balancing" is only to determine if the crime committed can be considered "a political crime" as opposed to a "nonpolitical crime". Once it is determined, as in this case, that the serious crime is of a nonpolitical nature, one need not consider the consequences of the applicant returning to the country where the applicant fears persecution.
[59]
There is no need to consider the first two questions submitted by the applicant.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/saf
Footnotes
1. Professor Hathaway, in
The Law of Refugee Status
(Markham, Ontario: Butterworths, 1991), states at pp. 212-213:
"[E]xclusion based on de facto nationality is truly an exceptional occurrence which implies the effective legal assimilation of the refugee to her host population. Because the clause requires residence in the state willing to confer effective nationality, neither an inchoate right to protection, nor indeed physical presence short of continued residence, is sufficient to warrant exclusion.
"Moreover, de facto nationality is qualitatively distinct from even long-term residence in a state, since it requires a consequential guarantee of rights to the refugee on terms at least as favourable as those which follow from Convention refugee status. Most critically, the rights of entry and of freedom from removal or expulsion must be clearly conferred and respected, a point emphasized by the Federal Court of Appeal in both
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  the Board in assessing credibility, the Board has an obligation to express any negative finding of credibility in "clear and unmistakeable terms" (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R.(2d) 199 (F.C.A.)). This generally includes the obligation to give examples or illustrations of the basis for not accepting the applicant's testimony (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
Handbook on Procedures and Criteria for Determining Refugee Status under the 1951 Convention and the 1967 Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees
(Geneva: 1988) Doc. No. HCR/IP/4/Eng. Rev. 1 (hereinafter
Handbook
).
4. Waldman,
Immigration Law and Practice
(Markham, Ontario: Butterworths, 1992+), ยง8.220 at p. 8.205.
5. The respondent indicates that this decision is currently under appeal to the Federal Court of Appeal.
6. In that case, Mr. Justice MacKay noted:
"In my view, the purpose of Article 1E is to support regular immigration laws of countries in the international community, and within the
Immigration Act
of this country to support the purposes of that
Act
and the policies it seeks to legislate, by limiting refugee claims to those who clearly face the threat of persecution. If A faces such a threat in his own country, but is living in another country, with or without refugee status, and there faces no threat of persecution for Convention reasons, or put another way, A there enjoys the same basic rights of status as nationals of the second country, the function of Article 1E is to exclude that person as a potential refugee claimant in a third country.
"In my view, the tribunal did not err in considering whether the claim by the male applicant was excluded from the definition of Convention refugee in s. 2(1) of the
Immigration Act
. Nor did it err in the manner in which it considered that issue, by considering the basic rights to which the applicant was apparently entitled under the Constitution and laws of Estonia and comparing those with the rights acknowledged for Estonian nationals. That approach is one supported by the authors to which counsel for the applicants referred, and it is a reasonable approach.
"That said, in my view the tribunal in this case erred when it found that Article 1E applied to the male applicant's claim and then proceeded to consider, not expressly as an alternative, the merits of the claim. In outlining 'issues Pertinent to the Application of the exclusion Clause Article 1E', at p. 16 of its decision, the tribunal sets out the manner in which its concern about the application of Article 1E was raised with counsel and then states 'OF course, if the panel were to decide that the male claimant did fall under the purview of Article 1E, the panel would then consider his claim against Estonia on the merits'. As I understand the decision that is what the tribunal did do, when, if it were correct that the male applicant's claim was within the purview, i.e., the meaning, of Article 1E, that would ordinarily be the end of the matter for his claim is then excluded from consideration as a refugee claim. This is the result reached by the tribunal in
Thambaiyah et al.
to which the tribunal here referred. Had that course been followed in this case, it is my opinion that the tribunal's determination would not have been found to be unreasonable or warranting intervention by the court on an applicant for judicial review. Intervention in relation to the tribunals finding that Article 1E is applicable to the applicant's claim in this case is similarly unwarranted."
7.
Waldman
, supra note 17, ยง8.218 at pp. 8.204-8.205.
8. The Supreme Court of Canada stated in
Ward
, ibid. at pp. 741-743, in discussing exclusion under s. 19 of the
Act
:
"...[E]xclusions on the basis of criminality have been carefully drafted to avoid the admission of claimants who may pose a threat to the Canadian government or to the lives or property or residents of Canada. The provisions specifically give the Minister of Employment and Immigration enough flexibility, however, to reassess the desirability of permitting entry to a claimant with a past criminal record, where the Minister is convinced that rehabilitation has occurred. In this way, Parliament opted not to treat a criminal past as a reason to be estopped from obtaining refugee status.
. . . . .
"In the amended
Immigration Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2, Parliament has further responded to the concern of keeping out dangerous and criminal claimants by excluding from the definition of 'Convention refugee' in s. 2 of the
Act
any person to whom the Convention does not apply pursuant to s. E or F of art. 1 thereof, which sections are set out in the schedule to the
Act
.
. . . . .
"The articulation of this exclusion for the 'commission' of a crime can be contrasted with those of s. 19 of the
Act
which refers to 'convictions' for crimes ... [Professor] Hathaway would appear to confine paragraph (b) to accused persons who are fugitives from prosecution ... I note ... the Professor Hathaway's interpretation seems to be consistent with the views expressed in the
Travaux prรฉparatoires
... As such, Ward would still not be excluded on this basis, having already been convicted of his crimes and having already served his sentence."
[End of document]