[1]
Hargrave, Prothonotary
: This is the motion of the defendants 573475 Alberta Ltd. and 617587 Alberta Ltd., the owners of the "Edmonton Queen", a vessel recorded at the Edmonton Shipping Registry, now transferred to the Vancouver Shipping Registry, to obtain the release of the vessel from arrest by setting aside the arrest or, as alternatives, to release the vessel either without bail or with bail, the court to set the amount. While other relief is sought, those branches of the motion are not the subject of these reasons.
Background
[2]
The two Alberta numbered limited companies, whom I refer to as owners, in the sense of recorded owners, purchased the "Edmonton Queen", a shallow draft 400 passenger river boat of about 150 feet in length, on a court-ordered sale pursuant to the Order of Associate Chief Justice Jerome made February 17, 1995, at the price of $800,000.00.
[3]
The owners subsequently moved the vessel from the builder's yard in Edmonton to Whitemud Park for launching, at the cost of some $185,000.00.
[4]
The plaintiffs claim a one-third ownership interest in the vessel and in the defendants total operation, the claim arising from an alleged agreement between the plaintiffs and the defendants for services provided by the plaintiffs in obtaining and launching the "Edmonton Queen". The plaintiffs, who say that they have been denied their interest in the vessel, issued a Statement of Claim on May 11, 1995, and arrested the vessel where she is presently lying, not quite afloat and with a slight list, in the North Saskatchewan River, on May 12, 1995.
[5]
In addition, the plaintiffs claim $1 million in damages for breach of agreement and breach of duty of good faith. However, that is not an in rem claim and therefore has no bearing on the security issue.
Analysis
[6]
Counsel for the plaintiffs argued that since his clients claim a one-third interest in the value of the defendants' whole business enterprise, not just the vessel, the plaintiffs should be secured for their whole claim. The interest that the plaintiffs claim in the business operation, outside of the vessel, is not an in rem claim. Only the plaintiffs' in rem claim to one-third of the ownership of the vessel can be secured pursuant to the arrest of the vessel.
[7]
The owners say that the arrest should be set aside for they bought the vessel by court order free and clear of any claims. That argument is invalid. While the plaintiffs could conceivably have an in personam claim against the owners for breach or anticipatory breach of contract, arising before the owners purchased the vessel, any in rem claim for a share of the ownership of the "Edmonton Queen", arising out of dealings between the plaintiffs and the defendants, could only come into being on the purchase of the "Edmonton Queen" by the defendant owners. The vessel was not purchased free and clear of any claims arising out of the actions of the defendants as owners.
[8]
The defendants suggest that this action is frivolous and that the vessel ought not to have been arrested. I do not see that the action is frivolous. Once a plaintiff commences an in rem claim, in the Federal Court by issuing a statement of claim, that plaintiff, except in exceptional circumstances, also has a right to invoke the arrest procedure in order to obtain security. While
Federal Court Rule
1003(1), which governs the issuance of a warrant, is discretionary:
"1003(1) In an action in rem, a warrant for the arrest of property
may
be issued at any time after the filing of the statement of claim or declaration." (emphasis added)
in practice a warrant is issued by the Court Registry as a right: see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  on
Admiralty Jurisdiction and Practice
, Lloyd's of London Press, 1993, at p. 121, where the author refers to the view of Mr. Justice Sheen in an unreported 1990 decision, the
"Mediterranean Carrier"
, noting that if some discretion is required to be exercised, it has to be exercised by the Admiralty Registrar, but in practice the Admiralty Registrar, or in our court, the appropriate Register Officer, will permit the arrest in virtually all cases falling within the
Rules
.
[9]
At a later stage the court has a discretionary power to release the vessel, an alternative which the defendants seek and to which I will shortly turn.
[10]
Before proceeding further I note that there is an issue as to whether a prothonotary has the jurisdiction to release a vessel without bail. Rule 1006(1) provides that a release may be issued by the court and that would include a prothonotary. Rule 1006(2) sets out specific instances in which a prothonotary may release a vessel: release, without bail, is not included. Finally, rule 1006(5) provides that if a release is issued by the court, presumably when the reason for the release is outside the specific instances in which a prothonotary may grant a release, it shall be signed by the presiding judge. Without more, this clearly means that a prothonotary may not hear a motion for the release of a vessel without bail as is sought in the present instance. However, in this instance, the Associate Chief Justice has specially assigned this matter pursuant to rule 336(g) of the
Federal Court Rules
and thus I may deal with the motion.
[11]
The affidavits filed by the parties are in part loosely drafted and in places leave one wondering at the source of information. In some instances, I have made an allowance in the manner in which I have weighed the evidence.
[12]
The owners say the vessel is to be used locally, is insured and will not be leaving the jurisdiction. For these reasons counsel submits the vessel should be released without bail.
[13]
The release of a vessel without bail or security is an implication that the arrest was unlawful and the security unnecessary: see for example
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), at p. 18  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . I am not prepared to find that the arrest was unlawful.
[14]
One of the functions of an arrest is to provide security to the plaintiff to an amount sufficient to cover the amount of a plaintiff's reasonably best arguable case, in rem, together with interests and costs, capped at the value of the vessel.
[15]
The liberal approach traditionally taken by the Admiralty Courts is that: "... when the arrest is made in good faith - for the purpose of obtaining security for a just demand - then I am of the opinion that the English Court should not restrain it ... ": Lord Denning in
Mike Trading and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  the plaintiffs' arrest of the "Edmonton Queen" merely on the belief of the deponent of the affidavit sworn, on behalf of owners, that the action is scandalous and an attempt to hinder or delay the defendants in completing the "Edmonton Queen" in time for the 1995 tourist season, for that would deprive the plaintiffs of security to which they are prima facie entitled. If at some later date it turns out that the arrest was improper, the owners have their remedy by way of a counterclaim or claim for wrongful arrest.
[16]
While the plaintiffs are entitled to reasonable security, I have also kept in mind that security, so long as it adequately protects the plaintiffs, should not be so onerous that a vessel must remain under arrest during a commercial period or season and thus deprive the owners of use and earnings.
[17]
Counsel, on behalf of the plaintiffs, urged that the vessel was not being properly looked after and, for that reason also, bail ought to be posted. The plaintiffs pointed to near problems during launching; pumping water into an unmarked tank that should have contained fuel (on an assurance from the builder that it was a water tank); that the vessel is presently sitting on bottom with a 10 degree list (although nothing is said as to the nature of the bottom); and that owners neither know what they are doing nor know the hazards of the route over which the vessel will be operating, all of which is said to prejudice the plaintiffs and to require substantial bail.
[18]
Conversely, a vessel under arrest and not used usually deteriorates more quickly than an operating vessel. Properly insured, I do not think that the risks are substantially greater if the vessel is released, as opposed to the vessel remaining under arrest.
[19]
The plaintiffs also say that when the vessel belonged to them, or to some of them, before the judicial sale, and was arrested by various creditors, they were required to put up bail if they wished the vessel released. However, the claims against the vessel were then of a different nature, principally that of a builder claiming a possessory lien, as opposed to the present part ownership dispute.
[20]
In some instances security, in the form of a bail bond, is appropriate and, indeed, this is particularly so when the vessel could leave the jurisdiction or might suffer loss or damage so as to impair the plaintiff's security as represented by the vessel. But one cannot generalize as to appropriate security: each case ought to be looked at in its own particular context in order to decide on an appropriate form of security.
[21]
In the ongoing saga of the "Edmonton Queen", the present arrest is not that of an arm's length supplier of goods and services, or that of a builder, with a possessory lien, as was the situation which resulted in the sale of the vessel, but rather is a claim or co-ownership. In the former instances, a bail bond or some form of cash-based security may well have been called for; in the latter instance it may be unnecessary where the claimant can adequately be secured in a less onerous way, for security is to protect a claimant, not to punish or to unnecessarily handicap a vessel owner. For that reason I turned to insurance, together with various conditions, as appropriate security. By utilizing the benefit of insurance the plaintiffs, as co-ownership claimants to the vessel, are adequately protected in that if they are successful at the end of the day they may look forward either to an ownership interest in the vessel, or if the vessel were lost or damaged, to proceeds of insurance.
[22]
In deciding upon security in the form of an interest in the insurance, I have not lost sight of the various concerns, including both those of the plaintiffs over the way in which the vessel is being operated and those of the defendants who may need the benefit of hull and machinery insurance to cover small losses. I have therefore ordered that the "Edmonton Queen" be released against certified copies of a current hull and machinery and liability policies which included the terms and conditions that:
(a) Insurance be placed to the vessel's full insurable value, from time to time, as updated at reasonable intervals by the owners;
(b) That the insurance set out sailing limits for the vessel, to insure that it stayed within navigable waters and that the vessel's master be approved by underwriters with the insurance to cover movement to and from the water and winter storage;
(c) In the event of total loss the insurance provide for payment of one-third of the insured value, from time to time, into court to stand as security;
(d) In the event of partial loss or damage to the vessel, up to 10% of the then insured value, all insurance proceeds to be paid for repairs;
(e) In the event of partial loss or damage of over 10% of the vessel's value, underwriters to pay one-third of the then insured value of the loss or damage into court to stand as security, without prejudice to the defendants' ability to apply for those proceeds for payment of repairs;
(f) That there be liability coverage in an amount as recommended by brokers, taking into account the trade engaged in by the vessel; and
(g) That underwriters give two weeks' notice of any cancellation to the plaintiffs.
[23]
The defendants, in turn, are not to sell or charter the vessel or to move the vessel out of the jurisdiction.
[24]
This security may be less certain than owners would like. However, it also recognises that the owners have some right to get the vessel ready for and to operate during the 1995 tourist season, which is rapidly approaching. From the point of view of the plaintiffs, as claimants of a minority interest in the vessel, they are no worse off secured by insurance than they would be as actual owners were the vessel to be lost or damaged.
[25]
Finally, the plaintiffs also say that they should be secured not on the basis of the purchase price of the vessel, $800,000.00, but rather on an appraised value of $2.2 million. This is in breach of the principle that security should not be greater than the value of the vessel. The price for which the vessel was sold and purchased, on a judicial sale earlier this year, after appropriate advertising and negotiation of the purchase price by the Admiralty Marshall and by the Marshall's advisors, Coopers & Lybrand, is the best evidence of the value of the vessel and thus of the security required, subject to increases in the insured value of the vessel by reason of improvements to the vessel.
[26]
Security shall therefore be in the form of insurance, at the full insurable value from time to time of the vessel, the insurance to include the terms and conditions set out above.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Gary W. McLaughlin/sg
[End of document]