 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (FC)
MLB unedited judgment
Allen Laboucan, Floyd Noskiye, Leslie Joe Laboucan, Mona Dumas, Robert Charlie Nanooch and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
Federal Court
Preston, Assessment Officer
February 24, 2009.
Counsel:
N/A, for the applicants;
James A. Duke, Q.C., for the respondents.
Solicitors of Record:
Owen Law, Edmonton, Alberta, for the applicants;
Miller Thomson, Edmonton, Alberta, for the respondents.
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary. Any footnotes found in this case will appear below end of document.
[1]
Preston, Assessment Officer
: By way of judgment dated February 15, 2008, the Court dismissed the Applicants' Application for Judicial Review, with costs.
[2]
On March 25, 2008, the Respondents filed their Bill of Costs together with a letter requesting an assessment of their Bill of Costs.
[3]
On May 15, 2008, Charles E. Stinson, Senior Assessment Officer, issued the following oral direction (confirmed in writing):
The Senior Assessment Officer, Charles E. Stinson, has noted the bill of costs of the Respondents filed March 25, 2008 and has further noted that its assessment appears appropriate for disposition by way of written submissions.
Therefore, the Senior Assessment Officer has directed that:
a) the Respondents may serve and file all materials (if not already done), including the bill of costs, supporting affidavit and written submissions, by June 10, 2008;
b) the Applicants may serve and file any reply materials by July 4, 2008;
c) the Respondents may serve and file any rebuttal materials by July 25, 2008.
[4]
Pursuant to that direction the Respondents have filed their Bill of Costs, and the affidavit of James A. Duke, Q.C. The Applicants have failed to file any materials in opposition to the Bill of Costs.
[5]
In the absence of any submissions in opposition to the Bill of Costs, Charles E. Stinson, Senior Assessment Officer, determined in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2007] F.C.J. No. 256, at paragraph 2:
Effectively, the absence of any relevant representations by the Plaintiff, which could assist me in identifying issues and making a decision, leaves the bill of costs unopposed. My view, often expressed in comparable circumstances, is that the
Federal Courts Rules
do not contemplate a litigant benefiting by an assessment officer stepping away from a position of neutrality to act as the litigant's advocate in challenging given items in a bill of costs. However, the assessment officer cannot certify unlawful items, i.e. those outside the authority of the judgment and the Tariff.
[6]
Having reviewed the file it is clear that I am without jurisdiction to allow Item 15, the preparation and filing of written argument, where requested or permitted by the Court. I can find no order or direction of the Court requesting or permitting written argument. Further, the only written argument filed by the Respondents is the Memorandum of Fact and Law contained in the Respondents Application Record, which is provided for under Item 2.
[7]
With the exception of Item 15, having reviewed the file and the Court's Reasons for Judgment and Judgment, all other assessable services and disbursements are allowed as claimed.
[8]
The Respondents' costs, presented at $3,311.75, are assessed and allowed at $2,591.75. A certificate of assessment will be issued.
[End of document]