[1]
Strayer, J.
: This is an application for me to rescind my order of May 20, 1994, which I made on my own motion dismissing the application for judicial review because of the applicant's failure to file its application record within the time prescribed by rule 1606. This application also requests an extension of time for filing the application record in the main proceeding.
[2]
That time expired approximately February 1, 1994. On March 14, 1994, a Registry Officer of the court wrote to counsel for the applicant pointing out that the application record had not been received and drawing to his attention subrule 1606(1). The letter concluded as follows:
"The court has directed the Registry to advise you that unless within the next ten days you comply or request to be heard, the matter will be sent to the court and may be dismissed for want of prosecution."
Counsel for the applicant apparently understood this to mean that if the applicant did file an application record within ten days the matter could proceed. When however the applicant tried to file its record it was advised that it must have the leave of the court under rule 1614. Counsel for the applicant believe that they filed such an application in early April although no copy of such documents can be found in the court nor, it appears, in the office of counsel. When the matter was placed before me on May 20, 1994, it appeared to be a case where nothing had been filed by the applicant since the originating notice of November 12, 1993, notwithstanding the warning from the Court Registry of March 14, 1994. I therefore acting, as I believed, under rule 1617 on my own initiative dismissed the action for want of prosecution. The applicant subsequently filed a notice of motion on May 27, 1994, to have my order rescinded. I reviewed that motion and indicated to counsel for the applicant that I required some evidence as to why the application record had not been filed on time. I pointed out that even though all parties consented to the delay in filing this was not adequate because extensions of time require the approval of the court and the provisions of rule 1617 allowing the court to dismiss actions on its own initiative indicate that the court has a distinct interest in ensuring that these matters proceed in a timely fashion.
[3]
Since that time the applicant has filed a further affidavit. The essential point of this affidavit is to explain that the applicant had delayed filing its application record because it had not received any affidavits from the respondents which, according to rule 1603, should have been filed within 30 days after the originating notice of motion was served on them. I am unable to find in the
Rules
any provision which extends the time for filing the applicant's record beyond the 60 days prescribed in rule 1606 because of delays by the respondent in filing affidavits in reply under rule 1603. Again it must be emphasized that the time limits prescribed in the 1600
Rules
are not solely for the convenience of the parties and for their waiver by mutual agreement: the court has a role under the
Rules
in ensuring that these judicial review applications proceed in a timely fashion.
[4]
However, since I issued my order of dismissal of May 20, 1994, the Federal Court of Appeal in the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), has interpreted narrowly the power of the court under rule 1617 to dismiss an action on its own initiative. That rule provides:
"1617(1) The court may, on application or its own initiative, by order, dismiss an application for judicial review by reason of the applicant's undue delay in prosecuting it.
"(2) The applicant and other parties shall be given at least ten days' notice and an opportunity to be heard before an order is made under paragraph (1)."
According to this judgment, the court cannot dismiss an application on its own initiative "in the absence of either a motion by a party or a show cause order by a judge". As there was no such motion by a party, and as I did not precede my order by a show cause order, I am rescinding my order of May 20, 1994. As that order was made in effect ex parte I have power to rescind it pursuant to rule 330.
[5]
In the present application the applicant further requests an extension of time for filing its application record which it has never filed. According to affidavit evidence the respondents have consented to such an extension. For the reasons stated above I find no justification for an extension of time for filing. It appears to me that in deliberately waiting to commence preparation of an application record until over one month after the filing time had expired the applicant proceeded on one or more misapprehensions: such as that it need not file its application record until it had received the affidavits in reply of the respondents or been assured that there would be no such affidavits; or that compliance with the time limits was a matter simply for agreement among the parties.
[6]
In coming to my decision to refuse the extension of time I have taken into account and accept from the affidavit evidence that the applicant had a continuing intention to pursue the application. There are no submissions before me as to the merits of the principal application and it is therefore difficult for me to form any opinion on that question. I assume there would be no material prejudice to other parties by delay as they have consented to the extension. The material does not, however, provide a reasonable explanation for the delay. By its own claim the applicant did not start to prepare its application record until "early March", over a month after the application record should have been filed. There is no suggestion in the material that this delay was due to any unforeseen crisis or impossibility: it was simply because counsel for the applicant thought it appropriate to wait for the filing of affidavits from adverse parties, affidavits which according to the
Rules
should have been filed within 30 days after service of the notice of motion which was filed in the court on November 12, 1993.
[7]
I feel obliged to comment on certain observations of counsel for the applicant Harry Radomski in his affidavit in support of this motion for an extension. He states:
"... In my experience, insisting on strict compliance with the time requirements where no prejudice to one's client is indicated is counter-productive and wasteful of the resources of the parties and of this Honourable Court."
What is counter-productive and wasteful of resources is a failure to meet the time requirements of the judicial review rules, as this application well demonstrates. He concludes by saying
"It has always been my understanding that the court would grant reasonable extensions of time under the rule 1614, if advised of the consent of the parties to such extensions. Had I known that the court would not grant such extensions, I would have insisted that the respondents deliver their material within the time contemplated by the
Rules
."
Mr. Radomski may now have to review his "understanding", one which is not I think uncommon among practitioners. An extension is not "reasonable" unless there is some reasonable explanation for it, a requirement which I find not to be met in the circumstances.
[8]
The application for an extension is therefore dismissed.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/gas
[End of document]