[1]
Rothstein, J.
: This is an application for dismissal for want of prosecution.
The Plaintiff's Claim
[2]
The plaintiff's statement of claim alleges that in May 1975 the plaintiff leased from the defendant certain lands, for agricultural purposes, near the Winnipeg International Airport for a period of five years. The plaintiff says that the land was unfit for agriculture due to a pre-existing weed problem known to the defendant. Pursuant to a condition in the lease, the defendant retained the right to enter the leased land. In doing so the plaintiff says that the defendant caused damage to the plaintiff's crops. interfered with the plaintiff's farming operations and allowed chemicals to spill onto the leased area. It is also alleged that the defendant ploughed ditches adjacent to the leased land, depositing material from the ditches onto the leased land resulting in the growth of weeds harmful to the leased land. Finally, it is alleged that the defendant allowed weeds to grow on adjacent land which spread to the plaintiff's land resulting in damage. The plaintiff says that the lease was terminated by agreement in December 1977. The plaintiff's claim is for damages for loss of crop income during the years 1975, 1976 and 1977 and for loss of income for the remainder of the lease term.
The Defendant's Position
[3]
The defendant denies virtually all of the plaintiff's allegations.
Chronology Of Events
[4]
The plaintiff's statement of claim was filed in the Federal Court on December 13, 1979. On May 9, 1980, the defendant filed a statement of claim in the Manitoba Court of Queen's Bench for the recovery of $11,805.75 of outstanding lease payments from the plaintiff for the lease of the land which is the subject of the plaintiff's action in this court. Examinations for discovery of both parties took place during 1980 and were concluded on October 27, 1982.
[5]
There was some correspondence between counsel for the parties in 1983 and 1984. During 1985, 1986 and 1987, the plaintiff attempted to retain an expert and finally did so in November 1987.
[6]
Plaintiff's counsel wrote to defendant's counsel on December 3, 1987, advising of the retention of the expert and other matters. Defendant's counsel responded on June 21, 1988, suggesting discontinuance by set-off of the claims of both the plaintiff and defendant.
[7]
Throughout 1988, 1989 and 1990, the plaintiff says that he was in contact with his expert. In March of 1990, certain maps were requested of and received from the defendant. In November of 1990, the plaintiff's expert, Brian Kelly, indicated to the plaintiff that he was leaving private practice and would not be able to complete the report and the matter was turned over to another expert, Ray Snitynsky. Mr. Snitynsky's report was submitted to the plaintiff in May of 1992 and forwarded to defendant's counsel on May 28, 1992.
[8]
On June 8, 1992, defendant's counsel wrote to plaintiff's counsel to indicate that a motion for dismissal for want of prosecution was appropriate in this case and that he was researching the law relative to dismissal for want of prosecution. Plaintiff's counsel responded on June 19, 1992, that the matter should proceed on its merits.
[9]
On October 20, 1992, plaintiff's counsel attended at the Federal Court to ascertain available trial dates.
[10]
On October 26, 1992, defendant's counsel filed a notice of motion for dismissal for want of prosecution and served it on plaintiff's counsel on October 29, 1992.
[11]
On November 6, 1992, plaintiff's counsel filed a unilateral application for time and date of trial and a preliminary motion to have the defendant's motion for dismissal for want of prosecution heard orally.
Rule 440 - Federal Court Rules
[12]
The plaintiff makes a preliminary objection that the defendant has not complied with the requirements of s. (2) of rule 440 of the
Federal Court Rules
and, as a result, no application for dismissal for want of prosecution may be made. Rule 440 provides:
"440(1) If the defendant does not, within three months after the close of pleadings, receive notice of trial or have knowledge of an application for an order fixing the date for trial, he may, before notice of trial, or of an application for an order fixing the date for trial, apply to the court to dismiss the action for want of prosecution; and on the hearing of such application, the court may order the action to be dismissed accordingly, or make such other order on such terms as seems just.
"440(2) No application may be made under this rule unless the applicant is of the view that the plaintiff is not prosecuting the action with due dispatch and, save in exceptional circumstances, unless, at least two weeks before service of the notice of motion, the applicant has served notice in writing on the plaintiff that, unless the plaintiff takes the necessary steps to bring the action on for trial, such an application will be made."
[13]
After plaintiff's counsel had forwarded a copy of the expert's report to defendant's counsel on May 28, 1992, defendant's counsel wrote to plaintiff's counsel on June 8, 1992, indicating:
"We believe that a motion to dismiss for want of prosecution is appropriate in this case, rather than forcing the defendant to spend more time and resources in defending what, in our view, is clearly a frivolous action.
"We are conducting legal research of recent cases on motions to dismiss for want of prosecution, which research will be taken into account in determining the next step we propose to take in this matter."
Plaintiff's counsel says that the June 8, 1992, letter is not the notice contemplated by rule 440(2). Defendant's counsel says that inordinate delay alone is sufficient to dispense with the requirement for strict compliance with rule 440(2). The defendant relies on
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.C.(3d) 467, where at page 223 F.T.R., Strayer, J., states:
"However that rule (rule 440(2)) allows the court to relieve an applicant of such a requirement 'in exceptional circumstances'. I believe that exceptional circumstances exist here. The extraordinary delays by the plaintiff in the prosecution of this action would of itself be such a circumstance (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 272 (F.C.T.D.)). Also, I assume that one of the reasons for the requirement in rule 440(2) of a warning notice is to give the plaintiff an opportunity to take some further step in the action. In the present case, the plaintiff would have been precluded by rule 331A from taking such a step without itself giving one month's notice to the defendants, because there had been no 'proceeding' in the action for over one year. ... I therefore find that there were exceptional circumstances justifying the bringing of this motion without prior notice."
[14]
Rule 331A states:
"331A. Where a year or more, has elapsed since the last proceeding in a matter, a party who desires to proceed must give to every other party not less than one month's notice of his intention to proceed."
[15]
In the case at bar it was the plaintiff, after a lengthy delay, who revived the matter by forwarding a copy of an expert's report to the defendant. It was in response to this that defendant's counsel wrote to plaintiff's counsel on June 8, 1992, advising that he was considering a motion to dismiss for want of prosecution. On June 19, 1992, plaintiff's counsel wrote to defendant's counsel indicating why he considered such a motion inappropriate, concluding:
"With the foregoing in mind, then, and recognizing that the two of us will likely not be able to cross paths until the first week in August, I would respectfully invite you to focus on the substantive aspects of the claim with a view to enabling the two of us to meet early in August in order to discuss the steps to be taken from this point forward."
It seems to me that in this case, although defendant's counsel's letter of June 8, 1992 was not, in form, one that complied with rule 440(2), it had the effect intended by the rule in that plaintiff's counsel promptly proposed that they meet to discuss how the matter could be proceeded with from that point forward. Strayer, J.,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>   <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , called the notice under rule 440(2) a "warning notice ... to give the plaintiff an opportunity to take some further step in the action". This is what occurred in this case.
[16]
I conclude that no exceptional circumstances existed in this case to warrant the waiver of rule 440(2). However, I am of the opinion that the letter of June 8, 1992 was sufficient compliance with the requirements of the rule in these circumstances. Indeed, it prompted the response of plaintiff's counsel on June 19, 1992. The plaintiff's preliminary objection relative to rule 440(2) is therefore dismissed.
The Law
[17]
The principles applicable to a motion for dismissal for want of prosecution are set out in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; [1968] 1 All E.R. 543 (C.A.). At page 268 Q.B., Salmon, J., states:
"In order for such an application [to have an action dismissed for want of prosecution] to succeed, the defendant must show:
(1) that there has been inordinate delay. It would be highly undesirable and indeed impossible to attempt to lay down a tariff - so many years or more on one side of the line and a lesser period on the other. What is or is not inordinate delay must depend upon the facts of each particular case. These vary infinitely from case to case, but inordinate delay should not be too difficult to recognise when it occurs.
(2) that this inordinate delay is inexcusable. As a rule, until a credible excuse is made out, the natural inference would be that it is inexcusable.
(3) that the defendants are likely to be seriously prejudiced by the delay. This may be prejudice at the trial of the issue between themselves and the plaintiff, or between each other, or between themselves and the third parties. In addition to any inference that may properly be drawn from the delay itself, prejudice can sometimes be directly proved. As a rule, the longer the delay, the greater the likelihood of serious prejudice at the trial."
These principles were reviewed in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (H.L.). At page 900 All E.R., Lord Griffiths restates the principles in the following words:
"The power should be exercised only where the court is satisfied either ... that there has been inordinate and inexcusable delay on the part of the plaintiff or his lawyers and (b) that such delay will give rise to a substantial risk that it is not possible to have a fair trial of the issues in the action or is such as is likely to cause or to have caused serious prejudice to the defendants, either as between themselves and the plaintiffs, or between each other, or between them and a third party."
As to whether inordinate delay without excuse alone would justify dismissal of an action, Lord Griffiths states at page 903 All E.R.:
"However, counsel for the defendants submits that, once the limitation period has expired so that the plaintiff cannot commence a fresh action, inordinate and inexcusable delay in the conduct of the litigation should be a ground for striking out even though there can be a fair trial of the issues and the defendant has suffered no prejudice from the delay. What would be the purpose of striking out in such circumstances? If there can be a fair trial and the defendant has suffered no prejudice, it clearly cannot be to do justice between the parties before the court; as between the plaintiff and defendant such an order is manifestly an injustice to the plaintiff. The only possible purpose of such an order would be as a disciplinary measure which by punishing the plaintiff will have a beneficent effect on the administration of justice by deterring others from similar delays. I have no faith that the exercise of the power in these circumstances would produce any greater impact on delay in litigation than the present principles. ...
"The principles in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  need to show that the post-writ delay will either make a fair trial impossible or prejudice the defendant."
[18]
This court has adopted the same approach see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , and
Patex  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[19]
I am therefore satisfied that I should have regard to whether the delay has been inordinate, whether the delay is excusable and whether the delay has caused serious prejudice to the defendant.
Analysis
[20]
I am quite satisfied that there has been inordinate delay in this case. It is now some thirteen years since the filing of the statement of claim and ten years since examinations for discovery were completed (subject to the plaintiff satisfying undertakings).
[21]
While some of the delay is explained, some is not. In paragraph 10 of his affidavit, the plaintiff says that he made attempts to retain an expert in 1985 and 1986 but it was not until November 1987 that he was able to retain Brian Kelly. No reasons were given as to why it took three years simply to retain an expert.
[22]
Mr. Kelly had conduct of the preparation of the expert's report until he advised the plaintiff in November 1990, in response to the plaintiff's inquiry, that he was leaving private practice and would not be able to complete the report. The preparation of the report was given to one of Mr. Kelly's associates, Ray Snitynsky who had been working with Mr. Kelly. Mr. Snitynsky's report was delivered in May 1992.
[23]
While delay by counsel is considered delay by a party, and is not countenanced, it is not clear to me that the same rationale applies to the preparation of evidence and in particular, expert's reports. In this case, the plaintiff appears to have attempted, to no avail, to obtain the expert's report at an earlier date. He did pay progress invoices from the experts which, to my mind, evidences an intention on his part throughout the time the matter was with the experts, to move it forward.
[24]
There is a suggestion in some of the cases that the defendant should not be able to claim the cumulative effect of delays when, over different periods, they are passively countenanced.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.), Joyal, J., states at page 124:
"It seems to me, however, that if delays are passively countenanced over different periods of time, a defendant should not per se claim the cumulative effect of these delays. ..."
In this case, after a telephone conversation between counsel on November 21, 1984, the next communication was a letter from plaintiff's counsel to defendant's counsel on December 3, 1987, advising that an expert had been retained and that the plaintiff intended to proceed to trial. Defendant's counsel responded to that letter on June 21, 1988, suggesting that both sides discontinue their claims but indicating that if the matter proceeded, the defendant would retain an expert, incur costs therefore and seek recovery of such costs from the plaintiff.
[25]
In March 1990, plaintiff's counsel requested some maps from defendant's counsel and such maps were provided on March 15, 1990.
[26]
Thereafter, nothing transpired until May 28, 1992 when defendant's counsel forwarded a copy of Mr. Snitynsky's report to plaintiff's counsel. The covering letter contained an explanation of what had taken place between December 1987 and May 1992:
"It would be an understatement if I were to suggest that we ran into literally a litany of problems in obtaining on Mr. Dyker's behalf the report we acquired in relation to the airport claim. So as to enable you to have a sense of all that has transpired in the interim, we can tell you that:
1. Brian Kelly appeared to have completed compiling all of the information he required by the fall of 1988;
2. For reasons solely related to Mr. Kelly being involved in other projects, it was not until the fall of 1989 that he was able to meet with Mr. Dyker and the writer for the purpose of providing his preliminary conclusions;
3. Having been instructed by us to put his report into final form, Mr. Kelly once again provided us with a series of excuses. Although Mr. Dyker was not terribly happy with the delays that ensued, he was nonetheless sufficiently convinced of Mr. Kelly's expertise as to provide him with a further protracted period of time within which to complete his report.
4. On November 29, 1990, Mr. Dyker and I met with Mr. Kelly once again and at that time were informed by Mr. Kelly that, firstly, he was leaving private practice and that, secondly, he was not in a position to continue with the retainer in relation to the completion of the report for Mr. Dyker;
5. By January 31, 1991, we had retained a former colleague of Mr. Kelly's, Ray Snitynsky, who was then employed with the accounting firm of Deloitte & Touche, to take up where Mr. Kelly had left off;
6. Mr. Dyker, Mr. Snitynsky and the writer met many times throughout 1991 in order to exchange information and by the early fall of last year Mr. Snitynsky had his report more or less 'fleshed out';
7. Mr. Snitynsky then informed us that he had left private practice and it was to him, therefore, to complete the report on an independent consultation basis on off hours while employed with his present employer, United Grain Growers;
8. Having undertaken to complete his report on his own time, Mr. Snitynsky was good enough to give the matter some priority and on April 29, 1992, I received from him his report comprising an assessment of the business loss incurred by Mr. Dyker.
"I recite the foregoing by way of background and simply for the purpose of letting you know that despite outward appearances, both Mr. Dyker and the writer have been as diligent as we could be in the circumstances in proceeding toward a logical conclusion of this matter."
[27]
It was in response to this letter that defendant's counsel indicated that research on the matter of dismissal for want of prosecution would be conducted. The events which took place subsequently in 1992 have been outlined earlier.
[28]
As I appreciate the facts, defendant's counsel, although now relying on a cumulative delay, did nothing from November 1984 to December 1987 to insist that the plaintiff proceed or that a motion for dismissal for want of prosecution would be made.
[29]
Throughout the period December 1987 to May 1992, it appears as if the plaintiff moved forward, although in an extraordinarily slow manner, without prompting from the defendant. It was only when the plaintiff's expert report was served on the defendant, that defendant's counsel first indicated a serious intention to consider moving for dismissal for want of prosecution.
[30]
This is not a case where there is evidence that the plaintiff had lost interest in the case or that he or his counsel, at least since December 1987, were personally responsible for delaying the matter. Part of the delay is explained. The part that is unexplained did not, itself, cause the defendant to move for dismissal.
[31]
I come now to the question of prejudice. Serious prejudice to a defendant is an important consideration in an application such as this. In this case, defendant's counsel says that prejudice to a defendant is inherent in delay. More specifically, he submits that the defendant will be faced with the inability to locate and call some of the witnesses who may be necessary to rebut the plaintiff's allegations. He submits that these are allegations of oral representations made almost eighteen years ago, and that the witnesses that the defendant will be able to locate and call may have great difficulty reviving their memories to rebut or deny the oral representations alleged by the plaintiff.
[32]
With respect to the oral representations, plaintiff's counsel says that "the issue of precontract representations is dead" and that this is a "straw man". I take it from this that the plaintiff will not be relying upon oral representations at the trial and that plaintiff's counsel made these submissions in order to induce me to disregard the defendant's concern on this point. I accept what plaintiff's counsel has submitted.
[33]
With respect to the more general concern of the defendant, that it may not be able to locate witnesses and that those that it can locate will have difficulty reviving their memories, I refer to the cross-examination on the affidavit of Mark Mason, the defendant's affiant in this application, and the person who attempted to communicate with the defendant's witnesses.
[34]
As to the existence of documents:
"23. Q.	All right. Okay. Based on your review, is the file of your department intact? That is, has anything apparently gone missing in the years that have intervened?
A.	No.
24. Q.	With respect to the existing pleadings and, as you've just mentioned, transcripts, you have those on file although perhaps not with you this morning?
A.		Yes.
25. Q.	With respect to the relevant documents, at least those documents that are relevant from your department's perspective, those are all within a file or files?
A.		As far as I can tell."
[35]
These answers suggest that all relevant documents are still available.
[36]
In re-examination, defendant's counsel asked:
"141. Q.	... did you make any effort to check through the discoveries in the files to make sure that all the documents are, in fact, intact and on the file?
A.	 No, I did not."
I do not see how this latter exchange assists the defendant. It seems to me that if the defendant asserts serious prejudice, the onus is on the defendant to establish it. The fact that there was no search through the discoveries to ensure that all documents are intact and on the file, would appear to leave the matter open. Certainly, it does not prove serious prejudice.
[37]
With respect to the location of witnesses and the extent to which they can remember the relevant events, Mr. Mason stated in his affidavit that he attempted to communicate with seven potential witnesses. In cross-examination, plaintiff's counsel established the following:
"31. Q.	You indicate that existence, at least at one time, of seven potential witnesses to be called on behalf of the defendant?
A.		Yes.
. . . . .
42. Q.	You attempted to speak to Mr. Herney?
A.		Yes, I did.
43. Q.	And you were able to speak with him?
A.		Yes, I was.
. . . . .
49. Q.	But to make our job a little bit easier this morning. Mr. Herney no longer works for Transport Canada. Is he still employed with the federal government?
A.		Yes. I believe he - the number I was given leads me to believe that yes, he is.
50. Q.	Simply in another department.
A.		Yes.
51. Q.	Did you have one discussion with Mr. Herney or more than one discussion?
A.		One discussion.
52. Q.	That was by telephone?
A.		Yes.
53. Q.	Am I correct in thinking the discussion was fairly brief?
A.		Yes.
54. Q.	Did Mr. Herney have before him any documentation, pertaining to the matters in issue here, to assist him in refreshing his memory?
A.		No.
55. Q.	I take it, sir, that so far as you can tell from the time Mr. Herney was examined to the time you spoke to him by telephone, he would not have even had the opportunity to review the transcript arising from his examination for discovery.
A.		I think that would be a safe assumption.
56. Q.	So, the fact that Mr. Herney may now only recognize Mr. Dyker's name but presently has no recollection of the matters itself, is not as a result of him having reviewed anything, that's simply him trying to recollect without any outside assistance.
A.		That's correct."
[38]
With respect to another witness, Brian Thomas Hodgson, plaintiff's counsel established the following:
"63. Q.	Were you able to contact him?
A.		No, I was not.
64. Q.	Is he also one of the three witnesses who no longer works with Transport Canada?
A.		I believe, if you'll let me check again, I believe I was able to ascertain that he does still work with Transport Canada. Yes. He still works at Transport Canada. That is what I was told.
65. Q.	All right. And, the simple fact is, you were not able to speak to him directly.
A.		That's correct.
66. Q.	And you made one attempt to speak with him?
A.		I made two attempts to speak with him.
67. Q.	On one day or separate days?
A.		Two separate days.
68. Q.	And no attempts subsequently.
A.		None.
69. Q.	Do you know what office he's employed with within the Transport Canada department?
A.		That, I don't know.
70. Q.	You simply didn't make further inquiries.
A.		No, I don't believe I did."
[39]
With respect to a third witness, Mr. Doug Thompson, Mr. Mason was cross-examined as follows:
"85. Q.	All right. At all events, you had a telephone discussion with Mr. Thompson?
A.		Yes, I did.
86. Q.	Once again, at the time you spoke with him, he had no documentation before him that would have assisted in refreshing his memory?
A.		That's correct."
[40]
With respect to a fourth witness, Mr. Niewczas, Mr. Mason testified:
"91. Q.	All right. Your discussion with him was by telephone?
A.		Yes, it was.
92. Q.	So far as you know, at the time you spoke to him, he had no documents in hand that would have assisted him in refreshing his memory?
A.		That's correct."
[41]
A fifth witness was the former tenant of the property, George Schreyer. With respect to Mr. Schreyer, plaintiff's counsel established the following:
"104. Q.	And secondly, Mr. Mason, I understand that your attempt to reach Mr. Schreyer was in attempt to call him at what can fairly be described as a historical phone number or old address or some such thing?
A.		It was an attempt to locate his whereabouts by way of telephone or address.
105. Q.		All right. Based on old information on the file?
A.		No. I looked, I tried to update the information on the file.
106. Q.		By looking in the City of Winnipeg phone book or Henderson Directory; you didn't check the Beausejour rural phone book?
A.		No, I did not.
107. Q.		If you had, you would have found him but I'm not asking you to adopt that as evidence. So far, there's nothing on your file to indicate that Mr. Schreyer has passed away or left Canada or any such thing?
A.		No."
[42]
The sixth and seventh potential witnesses were Mr. Wolanik and Mr. Rycroft. With respect to these witnesses, plaintiff's counsel established:
"110. Q.	Were either of those persons, at any time, employed with Transport Canada?
A.		Mr. Rycroft and Mr. Wolanik were both.
111. Q.		So, they, too, are former employees and may be classified in the preamble of paragraph 21 as being two of the three of the seven witnesses who no longer work for Transport Canada.
A.		That's correct.
. . . . .
114. Q.		All right. Again, there's nothing on your file to suggest that either of those gentlemen has passed away or has left the country or any such thing.
A.		There's no indication of what's become of them."
[43]
With respect to other potential witnesses, Mr. Mason was asked the following:
"118. Q.	The fact that you didn't attempt to contact any other potential witnesses, to what do we attribute that? You just ran out of time or decided to stop at seven or is there some other reason?
A.		I just decided that these seven people whose names appeared on the file again and again, were seven people who were probably a good place to start. There are other names on the file which I didn't attempt to locate or contact.
. . . . .
122. Q.		All right. Do you know whether those persons or that person might still be employed with Transport Canada?
A.		No, I do not."
[44]
I conclude from the cross-examination of Mr. Mason that there is no direct evidence that witnesses are not available, and that there is no direct evidence that the witnesses will not be able to revive their memories once they review relevant documents and discuss the matter with counsel. In saying this, of course, I bear in mind that plaintiff's counsel has represented that the plaintiff will not be relying upon oral representations of the defendant, its servants or agents.
[45]
I cannot say, on the evidence in this case, that there will be serious prejudice to the defendant arising from the delay or that there cannot be a fair trial of the action.
[46]
Defendant's counsel submits that a defendant in the position of one wanting to move for dismissal for want of prosecution faces the dilemma of just how much effort and expense should be expended in order to deal with a procedural motion. While I sympathise with the defendant's dilemma, the court must still be satisfied, on a balance of probabilities, that the defendant will suffer serious prejudice. In my view, unless the defendant establishes that important witnesses cannot be located and cannot remember the relevant facts, this essential part of the test is not satisfied. In this case, defendant's counsel acknowledged in argument that the efforts in this regard were not an "extensive investigation". I conclude that the defendant has not established that it will be seriously prejudiced as a result of the plaintiff's delay in this action. I am, therefore, not satisfied that the outcome of this case should be decided on a procedural motion. The plaintiff should have his case decided on the merits providing he now proceeds expeditiously.
[47]
In the result, I must dismiss the application, but I do so on the following terms. No costs will be awarded to the plaintiff. The plaintiff shall take every reasonable step to bring this matter on for trial at the earliest possible date. Based on the representations made to me on this motion, the plaintiff shall not adduce evidence of oral representations made by the defendant, its employees, servants or agents.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/blk
[End of document]