[1]
Rothstein, J.
: The applicant, on or about February 27, 1991, submitted an application for landing in Canada to the Canadian Consulate General in Los Angeles, California. The application was made pursuant to the "Investor" class category which is defined in the
Immigration Regulations
, 1978, SOR/78-172, as follows:
"2(1) In these Regulations,
'investor' means an immigrant who
(a) has successfully operated, controlled or directed a business or commercial undertaking,
(b) has made a minimum investment, since applying for an immigrant visa, that will contribute to the creation or continuation of employment opportunities for Canadian citizens or permanent residents, other than the immigrant and the immigrant's dependents and
(c) has a net worth, accumulated by the immigrant's own endeavours,
(i) where the immigrant makes an investment referred to in subparagraph (a), (i) or (ii) or (b)(i) or (ii) of the definition 'minimum investment', of at least $500,000 or
(ii) where the immigrant makes an investment referred to in subparagraph (a)(iii) or (b)(iii) of the definition 'minimum investment', of at least $700,000."
[2]
The application for landing was refused by the visa officer in Los Angeles. In her letter dated November 4, 1991, to the applicant denying his application, the visa officer states:
"Unfortunately, you do not meet the business experience component of the category. You have spent your entire career as a government official. You have never successfully operated, controlled or directed a business or commercial undertaking; therefore, you must be refused in the investor category."
[3]
The visa officer goes on to state that while the applicant was considered in the independent category he was unable to meet minimum requirements for approval in that category.
[4]
Counsel for the applicant submits that as a result of the way in which the visa officer dealt with this matter, the respondent has erred in law and jurisdiction and did not conduct proceedings in accordance with the requirements of procedural fairness.
[5]
The applicant is a graduate in civil engineering. Since graduation he has worked full-time in the Soil and Water Conservation Bureau of the Department of Agriculture of Taiwan Province. In 1977, the applicant purchased land in Taiwan for $500,000 Cdn. for use as a commercial orchard. He personally performed sloping and contouring of the land. He also designed and built an irrigation system for the land in 1981. The land is used to grow oranges and olive trees. He hired a manager to deal with farm operations. He earns approximately $60,000 Cdn. per year from the farm and he continues to own the farm today.
[6]
The visa officer explained her approach and the reason why she came to her decision in her affidavit:
"17. I asked Mr. Chen to expand on his statements regarding the operation of his farm, such as net monthly profit, the market, and the number of employees. Mr. Chen stated that he had hired a manager to be responsible for the operation of the farm. Mr. Chen explained that his involvement was strictly technical and that he was not involved in the business side of the farm. He indicated to me that he had very little knowledge of the specifics of the operation of the farm, including profits or other basic information.
. . . . .
"22. ... I determined that Mr. Chen had little or no experience in operating, controlling, or directing a commercial or business undertaking.
. . . . .
"29. At the end of the interview, I told Mr. Chen that I was concerned that he did not have the required experience to qualify as an Investor or as an independent applicant. He did not add any new information to respond to my concerns."
[7]
The evidence indicates that the visa officer examined the applicant with respect to whether he had operated the farm. The evidence is that the applicant had hired a manager who was responsible for the operation of the farm. I am satisfied that the visa officer properly addressed this issue.
[8]
However, my review of the evidence does not disclose that the visa officer addressed herself specifically to whether the applicant controlled the farm or whether he directed it. Although the visa officer stated that the applicant had no experience in operating, controlling or directing a commercial business undertaking, nothing in the material indicates that she addressed anything other than whether the applicant had experience operating the farm.
[9]
As I read the definition of "Investor" in the
Immigration Regulations
, 1978
, an applicant need only demonstrate that he has successfully either operated or controlled or directed a business or commercial undertaking. The words in context are disjunctive. It is therefore incumbent on the visa officer to assess each aspect separately to determine whether an applicant falls under at least one of the criteria. In my view, the visa officer did not do so in this case. She seems to have concluded from the fact that the applicant was not involved in the operation of the farm, that he also did not control or direct it. In coming to her conclusion, she failed to give a distinct meaning to each of the words operated, controlled or directed.
[10]
From the fact that the applicant did not operate the farm it does not follow automatically that he did not control or direct it. The evidence indicates that he hired a manager. There is no suggestion that he simply rented out the land. That the applicant owned the farm and earned the profits and would presumably be responsible for the losses, at least prima facie, suggests that he must have had some involvement in controlling or directing it. This is a matter for the visa officer to determine by addressing the issues of control and direction distinctly and specifically. The failure of the visa officer to consider each criteria separately and make an assessment in respect of each, in my view, constitutes an error of law.
[11]
With respect to the question of procedural fairness, the visa officer indicated that she told the applicant she was concerned that he did not have the required experience to qualify as an investor or as an independent applicant. The applicant did not satisfy the visa officer's concerns. However, I am of the view that more than a general statement of concern is required.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R.(2d) 205, McNair, J., stated at page 215:
"I am also of the opinion that the visa officer committed a breach of the duty of fairness by his failure to afford the applicant an adequate opportunity to answer the specific case against him on the issue of related experience via-à-vis the job offer of production line manager, which could have been done and should have been done by an appropriate line of questioning once it became apparent that the application for permanent residence was likely to fail on that score."
[12]
In the present case, when the visa officer became concerned that the applicant might not qualify in the "Investor" class, she should have questioned him specifically on each of the criteria separately. For her to have simply expressed concern in a general way and then expected a meaningful response is, in my opinion, not consistent with the requirements of procedural fairness. In saying this, I am not suggesting a visa officer is required to conduct a seminar with each applicant as to the requirements of the
Immigration Act
or
Regulations
or indeed to phrase questions always using specific words or formulas. However, where the requirements to be met under the
Act
or
Regulations
are fairly straightforward and the visa officer has a concern that an applicant may not qualify, I do not think it is placing too great a burden on the visa officer to address each requirement specifically and illicit answers so that a clear assessment can be made as to whether the applicant comes within the relevant definition of the
Act
or
Regulations
. This was not done in the present case.
[13]
I therefore conclude that there was a denial of procedural fairness in the case at bar.
[14]
Because I have concluded there has been an error of law and a failure to afford procedural fairness to the applicant in this case, I would quash the order of the visa officer and refer the matter back for a redetermination, in accordance with the requirements of this decision, as to whether the applicant meets the "Investor" class definition as set forth in the
Immigration Regulations, 1978
. The redetermination may be made by the same visa officer or by a different one at a location convenient to the applicant. If there are any directions necessary in this regard, I shall remain seized of this matter for the purposes of giving such directions.
[15]
There is no order as to costs.
[16]
Neither counsel in this case requested that I certify a serious question of general importance under s. 83(1) of the
Immigration Act
for the purpose of appeal.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Angela E. McKay/slm
[End of document]