[1]
Strayer, J.
: The applicant seeks an order quashing a decision of the respondent of April 28, 1992. That decision convicted the applicant of the offence of possession of contraband contrary to s. 39(i) of the
Penitentiary Service Regulations
, C.R.C., c. 1251. This charge arose out of an incident which occurred at the Kent Institution on April 21, 1992, when during a search of the cells in the applicant's unit a homemade knife or "shank" was found in the applicant's cell. The only argument of any substance raised before me on behalf of the applicant was that the respondent in convicting the applicant misdirected himself as to the nature or burden of proof. It was argued that the respondent imposed a burden on the applicant of producing corroboration of his own evidence that he did not know that the knife was in his cell.
[2]
In undertaking judicial review of the decision of a penitentiary disciplinary court it is of fundamental importance to keep in mind the nature of such courts and also the nature of the judicial review process. The nature and functions of disciplinary courts have been well described by my colleague Denault, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at pp. 298-299. He noted that hearings before such disciplinary courts are administrative, not judicial or quasi-judicial, proceedings; that there is no particular procedure or rules of evidence applicable to such hearings; that such hearings are conducted as inquisitorial and not adversarial proceedings and that in general the only procedural requirement is that the court conduct itself with fairness. The judicial review powers of the Trial Division are prescribed in s. 18.1(4) of the
Federal Court Act
and are well-known. Only two points need to be noted. Since the disciplinary court has only an obligation to proceed with fairness, the power of the court to review on procedural grounds is confined to that. The court can, of course, review on jurisdictional grounds or for error of law but in respect of questions of fact the court can only set aside a decision of a body such as a disciplinary court where that court:
"based its decision or order on an erroneous finding of fact that it made in a perverse or capricious manner or without regard for the material before ..."
Therefore much of the jurisprudence cited to me, consisting of appellate court decisions in criminal matters involving proof of knowledge of possession of stolen or illicit goods, is not directly applicable.
[3]
I am prepared to assume, without deciding, that for the respondent to convict the applicant of this offence he would have to be satisfied of guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. I further assume (although counsel did not provide precise authority as to the applicability of this test) that possession of contraband is not proven unless the disciplinary court is satisfied that the inmate knowingly had possession of something which was found in his quarters.
[4]
The applicant's main attack centres on the following portions of the reasons uttered by the respondent chairman during the hearing:
"Mr. Lee relying on the presence of this thing in your possession I'm going to find you guilty of possession of this item of contraband. It's a defence that I have heard on quite a number of occasions that I didn't know it was there, and I look for indicators one way or the other in the whole of the story - perhaps on the periphery of the story to indicate whether or not that they - there is some validity to it - some substantiation - and I also recognize that sometimes that - is, is it, is - that it's not possible for an inmate to produce any substantiation for his defence because the defence is - well I didn't know anything about it and if I don't know anything about it how can I tell you how it got in there. In this case the things that I find significant are that you were involuntarily transferred because of problems at another institution. Not that that is - not that the fact that you were involuntarily transferred is proof that you are a problem inmate but it's one of the things that I've taken not of but the other thing that is of significance to me is the fact that this shank is the only thing in the box and it makes the box feel - when I picked it up - made it feel like a box containing something other than a tube of toothpaste and it makes me wonder when you say that when you handled it you didn't realize that it contained something other than a tube of toothpaste."
[5]
No one would describe this decision as a model of clarity or precision. It would behove the chairman of such courts to take more care in summarizing the evidence and in stating conclusions. (Indeed, the whole hearing process seems to have been much too casual.) However, I cannot see in the respondent's words any reviewable error. I think that one can interpret the chairman's statements in a reasonable manner as conveying that he did not believe the applicant's explanation that he did not know of the presence of the knife in his cell. In his view such a self-serving statement was not believable because of a combination of several factors: there was no independent evidence to substantiate it; the credibility of the applicant as a witness (he having already given cause for an involuntary transfer to Kent) was open to serious doubt; and the physical difference in its external feel between a box containing a tube of toothpaste and one containing a knife should have been noticeable to the applicant when he, by his own evidence, placed the boxes on the shelf in his cell. Combined these factors made it impossible for the respondent to believe the applicant's explanation. In short, the respondent obviously concluded that no reasonable doubt had been raised concerning the knowledge of possession which the respondent initially inferred from the finding of the knife in the applicant's cell.
[6]
I am unable to see anything here that amounts to a reviewable error of fact. The respondent had before him evidence upon which he could find as he did and I see nothing in his finding of fact that can be said to be perverse or capricious or made without regard for the material before him. Nor can I see he made any error of law in convicting on that evidence, assuming he was obliged to be satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt of the applicant's knowledge of the presence of the knife in his cell.
[7]
The application is therefore dismissed.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Reginald W. Curtis/sms
[End of document]