[1]
Nadon, J.
: The defendants Haydn Shipping Co. Ltd ("Haydn") and Marmaras Navigation Ltd. ("Marmaras") ask this court to set aside an order dated May 11, 1992 rendered by the Senior Prothonotary, to allow them to file a conditional appearance and to declare the service of the statement of claim, purportedly made upon them on March 12, 1992, invalid, null and void.
[2]
By his order dated May 11, 1992, the Senior Prothonotary granted a default judgment in favour of the plaintiffs. In support of their motion to obtain default judgment, the plaintiffs filed the affidavit of Vincent M. Prager. In paragraph 2 of his affidavit, Mr. Prager states:
"2. As appears from the Court Record, a statement of claim was duly served on the defendant on March 12, 1992 care of Amican Navigation Inc. in Montreal, who signed the Bill of Lading on behalf of the Master of the Vessel."
[3]
The affidavit of service of Hans Lachance, a sworn bailiff of Justice of the Province of Quebec, provides as follows at paragraphs 1 and 2 thereof:
"1. THAT I did on the sixth (6th) day of May, 1992, at 16:05 o'clock in the afternoon, serve HAYDN SHIPPING CO. LTD., with a paper which purported to be a true copy of the APPLICATION FOR JUDGMENT FOR DEFAULT OF PLEADINGS (rule 433), and the AFFIDAVIT OF VINCENT M. PRAGER, in this cause, by delivering to and leaving the same with JOSEE GARIEPY, a person apparently in charge at the business office of Amican Navigation Inc., the agent in Montreal for Haydn Shipping Co. Ltd., at 300 St-Sacrement Street, Suite 317, in the City and Judicial District of Montreal, Province of Quebec, Canada.
"2. THAT I did on the sixth (6th) day of May, 1992, at 16:05 o'clock in the afternoon, serve MARMARAS NAVIGATION LTD., with a paper which purported to be a true copy of the APPLICATION FOR JUDGMENT FOR DEFAULT OF PLEADINGS (Rule 433), and the AFFIDAVIT OF VINCENT M. PRAGER, in this cause, by delivering to and leaving the same with JOSEE GARIEPY, a person apparently in charge at the business office of Amican Navigation Inc., the agent in Montreal for Marmaras Navigation Ltd., at 300 St-Sacrement Street, Suite 317, in the City and Judicial District of Montreal, Province of Quebec, Canada."
[4]
It appears quite clearly from the affidavits of Mr. Prager and Mr. Lachance that service of both the statement of claim and the default judgment application was effected upon Haydn and Marmaras by leaving copies with Amican Navigation Inc. ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ), allegedly their agent for the purposes of service under rule 310(2).
[5]
Simply put, Haydn and Marmaras submit that Amican was not, at all material times herein, a person whose services were used regularly in connection with their contractual dealings in Canada. Hence, these defendants submit that service upon them at the offices of Amican was illegal.
[6]
Service upon Haydn and Marmaras was effected by serving the statement of claim and the default judgment application upon their purported agent, Amican. I am satisfied that Amican was not, at the relevant time, the defendants' agent within the meaning of rule 310(2) which provides:
"310(2) Where a person resident outside Canada who, in the ordinary course of his business, enters into contracts in Canada or enters into business transactions in Canada (as, for example, when a carrier receives goods in Canada for transport to someplace outside Canada) and, in that connection regularly makes use of the services of a person or persons resident in Canada, is sued in respect of any cause of action arising out of such a contract or transaction, personal service of the statement of claim or declaration or other document in the action upon any such person whose services the defendant actually made use of in connection with the contract or transaction in question shall be deemed to be personal service on the defendant as though an order had been duly made for substitutional service in that manner in the particular case."
[7]
There was no evidence before the Senior Prothonotary, when he made his order of May 11, 1992, nor before me, that Haydn and Marmaras made regular use of the services of Amican in connection with their contractual dealings in Canada. On the contrary, the evidence of George Christodoulou, a Director of Haydn, and that of Martin Daniel Glibbery, Manager of the Legal and Insurance Department of Marmaras, is to the effect that Haydn and Marmaras never used the services of Amican except for limited purposes resulting from the time charter party entered into between Haydn, as owner of the ship BOSPORUS, and Pegasus Lines Ltd. S.A., ("Pegasus") as charterer. According to Mr. Glibbery, Amican was at all material times herein, the agent for Pegasus.
[8]
The evidence before me (and before the Senior Prothonotary) was that Amican had signed the bill of lading on behalf of the master of the ship. Amican, as agent for Pegasus was authorized to sign the bills of lading in virtue of clause 41 of the charter party which provides in part, that:
"Charterers and/or their agents are hereby authorised to sign Bills of Lading on Owners/Master's behalf strictly in accordance with Mates Receipts which are to be signed only by the Master of Chief Officer."
[9]
The evidence was also the effect that Pegasus and Amican were authorized, on behalf of Haydn, to attend to the ship's husbandry.
[10]
However, neither the husbandry authority nor the authority to issue bills of lading are, in my view, sufficient to make of Amican a person whose services were regularly used by Haydn and Marmaras so as to allow service of the statement of claim and of the default application upon Haydn and Marmaras to be made upon  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), Mr. Justice Dubé, at pages 640 and 641 made the following remarks:
"In my view, the requirements of rule 310(2) must be strictly adhered to Substitutional service may only be effected under these provisions when the prospective defendants in the ordinary course of business enter into transactions in Canada, regularly make use of the services of that person served for the purposes of the transaction in question. The existence of all these elements cannot be presumed by the court without the benefit of an affidavit. It necessarily follows that service upon the nonresident defendants must be set aside."
[11]
I agree entirely with Dubé, J.'s, remarks. There cannot be any doubt whatsoever that service upon Amican did not constitute service upon Haydn and Marmaras. Thus the judgment by default must be set aside. Where, as here, a default judgment is obtained by a plaintiff, who has failed to serve the statement of claim and the default judgment application upon the defendant, that in itself is sufficient, in my view, to set aside the default judgment.
[12]
Haydn and Marmaras also ask that I declare the service made upon them at the offices of Amican, on March 12, 1992, to be invalid. I cannot see how I could do otherwise in the present circumstances.
[13]
For these reasons, the motion will be allowed. The order of May 11, 1992 shall be set aside and the service of the statement of claim made upon Haydn and Marmaras on March 12, 1992, at the offices of Amican, is declared invalid.
[14]
Costs shall be in favor of the defendants.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/slm
[End of document]