[1]
Dubé, J.
: This motion is for an order granting an interlocutory injunction restraining the defendants from selling their wares and services under the trademarks or trade names IDEA and IDEA AND DESIGN on the ground that they are confusing with the trademarks IKEA and IKEA AND DESIGN.
[2]
IKEA LIMITED is one of the IKEA family of companies operating worldwide, selling Swedish type furniture. The defendants, on or about December 11, 1985, opened a furniture store across the street from the IKEA store in Victoria, B.C. The manager of the local IKEA store states in his affidavit that he first became aware of the activities of the defendants when he saw an advertisement in the November 21-27, 1985, edition of "Monday Magazine", a newspaper which circulates in Victoria.
[3]
In determining whether trademarks or trade names are confusing, the court shall have regard to all the surrounding circumstances, including the five criteria listed under s. 6(5) of the Trade Marks Act which read as follows:
"(a) the inherent distinctiveness of the trademarks or trade names and the extent to which they have become known;
"(b) the length of time the trademarks or trade names have been in use;
"(c) the nature of the wares, services or business;
"(d) the nature of the trade; and
"(e) the degree of resemblance between the trademarks or trade names in appearance or sound or in the ideas suggested by them."
[4]
In my view, the IKEA mark is strong, distinctive and deserves protection. It is known the world over. The owners have spent considerable amounts of money over the years, and still do, so as to keep the word IKEA before the public. On the other hand, the word IDEA is a common noun and the IDEA furniture store only begins to be known locally. The nature of the wares sold is of the same nature. Visually, the degree of resemblance is not that striking, as witness the two trademarks:
[Diagram omitted. See printed version.]
Only one letter in each name is different, but the letter "K" in IKEA comes out strikingly and gives the mark a very strong Scandinavian flavour, whereas the mark IDEA evokes mostly a concept, or a thought. At first glance, the two look different.
[5]
However, to the ear, they sound very much alike. Words may be quite different in appearance and yet the sound may be so similar as to create confusion. See, for instance,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , as reported in Fox on Trade Marks, Third Edition, at page 170. The word  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  was refused registration over  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  on the basis that when pronounced by the ordinary person, not with the clarity to be expected of a teacher of elocution, they were practically indistinguishable.
[6]
A regular customer of IKEA will not be visually confused, either by the names, the marks, or the appearances of the stores. The IKEA store in Victoria is surrounded by Swedish flags, whereas its competitor flies a good number of Canadian flags. But it is certainly possible that the imperfect pronunciation of either name, by telephone or directly to a prospective customer, could lead to confusion and direct some people to the wrong store. IDEA may have had that general
idea
when it decided to locate its store where it did.
[7]
At this stage of the proceedings, the plaintiffs merely have to prove that there is a serious issue to be tried. In my view, there is.
[8]
The plaintiffs, however, fail in their application for an interlocutory injunction on three other grounds: Firstly, they have not shown irreparable harm; secondly, the balance of convenience test favours the defendants; and thirdly, the relatively long delay in filing this application clearly works against the plaintiffs.
[9]
The onus is on the applicant to show that irreparable harm will ensue to him if the other party is allowed to continue in operation up to trial. At best, the plaintiffs have shown by affidavit that they may suffer some damage as a result of the competition across the street, but there is no valid indication that the harm would be irreparable. I will, therefore, order the defendants to keep an account of all their sales so that the matter of damage, if any, can be established when this matter is resolved by way of judgment after trial.
[10]
As to the balance of convenience, it seems obvious to me that this branch of IKEA can continue operating in Victoria with the presence of competition across the street without serious inconvenience to it and even less so to the far-flung IKEA operations around the world. On the other hand, an interlocutory injunction could conceivably cripple the newer and smaller IDEA operation between now and the day of judgment.
[11]
Finally, as mentioned earlier, the manager of IKEA in Victoria admits in his affidavit that he was made aware of the activities of the defendants as far back as November, 1985. They actually opened their doors in December of that year. The plaintiffs may not have expected the defendants to succeed and were in no hurry to seek this injunction, but during that period they allowed the defendants to expand time and money and to establish their business venture. In my view, this delay of more than a year has disentitled the plaintiffs from the remedy they now seek. Earlier action on their part could have tipped the balance of convenience to their side.
[12]
I also take into consideration the undertaking by the defendants to forward a disclaimer to all their customers to the effect that they are not IKEA and do not sell IKEA furniture. That will be made part of the order. Consequently, the motion is denied with costs to follow the event.
ORDER
1. The application is denied.
2. The defendants will keep an account of all their sales up to the date of judgment.
3. The defendants will issue a disclaimer to all of their customers, advising them that they are not IKEA and do not sell IKEA furniture.
4. Costs of this application to follow the event.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/sms
[End of document]