[1]
Gibson, J.
: These reasons arise out of an application for judicial review of a decision of the Convention Refugee Determination Division (the "CRDD")
of the Immigration and Refugee Board wherein the CRDD determined the applicant not to be a Convention refugee within the meaning of s. 2(1) of the
Immigration Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2. The decision of the CRDD is dated the 6th day of May, 1994.
[2]
The applicant is a 32 year old citizen of Nigeria. He bases his claim to Convention refugee status on an alleged well-founded fear of persecution if he is required to return to Nigeria, by reason of his political opinion and membership in a particular social group, that group apparently being journalists who speak out against the government of Nigeria.
[3]
The facts may be briefly summarized as follows. Between 1986 and sometime in 1989, the applicant, both as a university student involved in anti-government protests and as a free-lance journalist writing material that was critical of the government of Nigeria, came to the attention of government officials. He was detained on at least two occasions, interrogated, beaten and tortured. He was attacked by Muslim students. He was, according to his testimony, followed, harassed and threatened by intelligence agents. Two attempts were made on his life. Finally, he fled to Benin and from Benin to Zambia.
[4]
In Zambia, he obtained work as a teacher. He continued to write both in his own name and under a pseudonym. By March of 1992, conditions in Zambia had apparently degenerated for foreign persons. Accordingly, he determined to leave Zambia but before doing so, he obtained visas for both England and the United States.
[5]
In March of 1992, he returned to Nigeria from Zambia. He was detained and questioned on his arrival by air in Nigeria and his passport was seized. He was advised to return the next day to recover his papers. When he did so, on payment of a bribe, his passport was returned to him. He was advised to leave Nigeria quickly. He did so and flew to England. He stayed in England for six weeks, and then left for the United States where his visa remained valid for some months.
[6]
In the United States, he lost his passport. He overstayed his visa. He nonetheless managed to obtain work as a trainee truck driver. In the course of his training, he once travelled to Canada without incident. On his second visit to Canada, his status was discovered by Canadian authorities. On return to the United States side of the border, his illegal status was recorded. He returned back to the Canadian side of the border and claimed Convention refugee status. This was on April 5, 1993.
[7]
Throughout his stay in the United States and since coming to Canada, he has continued to write material critical of the Nigerian government. During his hearing before the CRDD, he explained this continued activity in the following way:
"In spite of whatever, even though I knew my claim wasn't a sure success going to be I couldn't for that fact say I will stop doing what I know is right to do. You know, I couldn't like put aside my obligations to my society simply because I'm making a refugee claim that I should start sticking my tail between my legs and doing something to appease the government which I know is not the right thing to do and which I don't even agree with anyways.
"So, definitely I will still go ahead with what I do in spite of whatever. If my fate is get sent back, get picked up, get killed. So let it will be, but I will not stop doing that." (Transcript, pp. 88 and 89, pp. 596-597 of the Tribunal Record).
In its decision, the CRDD stated:
"The claimant's testimony reveals that he is an educated person, having completed 19 years of education. He was hired by
The Guardian
newspaper in 1985. The editor of this particular newspaper referred to him as a brilliant, intelligent, reliable and hardworking freelance reporter. He is well aware of Nigeria's political, religious, social and economic situation, which he testified to without hesitation. The panel was impressed with his manner in which he gave answers to questions asked of him." (footnote omitted)
Despite the foregoing, the CRDD concluded that certain aspects of the applicant's testimony, which it considered central to its determination, were not credible and trustworthy. It found his explanation for one of the attempts on his life and his belief that the attempt was made by the military to be unreasonable. It found his explanation for not claiming Convention refugee status during the two year period that he was in Zambia not to be credible and to be inconsistent with his subsequent return to Nigeria. It described his treatment at the hands of immigration officials when he returned to Nigeria as "unreasonable to believe" and "strange".
[8]
The CRDD found the applicant's return to Nigeria in the spring of 1992 not to be consistent with a well-founded fear of persecution.
[9]
The CRDD found "odd" that a letter and affidavit in support of the applicant's claim from the editor of
The Guardian
did not refer to the applicant's harsh treatment by authorities in Nigeria.
[10]
Finally, the CRDD concluded that the failure of the applicant to claim Convention Refugee status in Zambia, where he lived and worked for approximately two years, in England, where he sojourned for six weeks, and in the United States where he lived for more than one year, not to be consistent with a well-founded fear of persecution were he required to return to Nigeria.
[11]
Counsel for the applicant identified three issues as follows:
(1) Did the CRDD make capricious findings of fact and err in law in concluding that the actions taken by the Nigerian authorities against the applicant were implausible? This question related to the applicant's testimony to the effect that he was surveiled by Nigerian authorities and that the same authorities eventually made an attempt on his life.
(2) Did the CRDD err in law by misconstruing both the definition of persecution as well as the test for determining the well-foundedness of the applicant's fear of persecution?
(3) Did the CRDD err in law by ignoring the documentary evidence before it and misconstruing the test for when a claimant may be called upon to request asylum in another country and what effect the fact that a claimant has not requested asylum previously would have on his or her claim?
[12]
On the first issue, the rejection as implausible of the applicant's allegations regarding certain actions allegedly taken by Nigerian authorities, while I might not have drawn the same conclusions on the totality of the evidence that was before the CRDD, I am satisfied that the conclusions drawn by it were reasonably open to it.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), Décary, J.A., speaking for the Federal Court of Appeal stated:
"There is no longer any doubt that the Refugee Division, which is a specialized tribunal, has complete jurisdiction to determine the plausibility of testimony: who is in a better position than the Refugee Division to gauge the credibility of an account and to draw the necessary inferences? As long as the inferences drawn by the tribunal are not so unreasonable as to warrant our intervention, its findings are not open to judicial review. In
Giron
[(1992), 143 N.R. 238 (F.C.A.)], the Court merely observed that in the area of plausibility, the unreasonableness of a decision may be more palpable, and so more easily identifiable, since the account appears on the face of the record. In our opinion,
Giron
in no way reduces the burden that rests on an appellant, of showing that the inferences drawn by the Refugee Division could not reasonably have been drawn."
[13]
On the second issue, the CRDD, having reviewed the evidence before it at some length, having analyzed the applicant's explanation for his failure to earlier claim Convention refugee status in any of the countries that he lived or sojourned in, and having briefly reviewed the then current conditions in Nigeria with respect to the situation of journalists, concluded that the applicant's fear of persecution was not objectively well-founded. Once again, I am satisfied that this conclusion was reasonably open to the CRDD.
[14]
The last issue related to the applicant's failure to earlier claim Convention refugee status in one of the countries in which he lived or sojourned after leaving Nigeria. The CRDD found the applicant's explanation to be "not satisfactory".  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  speaking for the Federal Court of Appeal, stated:
"While being of the view that the Immigration Appeal Board may have placed undue emphasis on the importance of the delay in making the claim for refugee status herein, we agree with the Board, nevertheless, that such a circumstance is an important factor which the Board is entitled to consider in weighing a claim for refugee status."
Here, the CRDD did not, I conclude, place "undue emphasis" on the importance of the delay. It treated the delay as simply one factor in weighing the applicant's claim. In doing so, I find it committed no reviewable error.
[15]
Against the foregoing analysis, I conclude that this application must be dismissed.
[16]
At the close of the hearing before me, I consulted counsel regarding the issue of certification of a question. Neither counsel recommended that a question be certified. No question is certified.
[17]
On oral application on behalf of the respondent, counsel for the applicant not objecting, I agreed to modify the style of cause in this matter to substitute the Minister of Citizenship and Immigration as respondent.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Angela E. McKay/slm
[End of document]