[1]
MacKay, J
: This application seeks review of the decision of the Minister of Transport to release to an undisclosed requestor information requested under the Access to Information Act, S.C. 1980-81-82-83, c. 111, Schedule II, as amended, now R.S.C. 1985, c. A-1, as amended, which information relates to the applicant and the applicant's operations. The application, under s. 44(1) of the Act, raises issues about the process under the Act for dealing with requests for information concerning third parties, and also about the protections which the Act provides for the interests of third parties.
[2]
The purpose of the Act as defined by s. 2(1) is:
"... to provide a right of access to information in records under the control of a government institution in accordance with the principles that government information should be available to the public, that necessary exceptions to the right of access should be limited and specific and that decisions on the disclosure of government information should be reviewed independently of government."
The right of access is set out in s. 4(1) which provides:
"4(1) Subject to this Act, but notwithstanding any other Act of Parliament, every person who is,
(a) a Canadian citizen, or
(b) a permanent resident within the meaning of the Immigration Act, has a right to and shall, on request, be given access to any record under the control of a government institution."
[3]
Exceptions to the right of access are specified in the Act, including some applicable where the information sought relates to a third party, that is, "any person, group of persons or organization other than the person that made the request or a government institution" (s. 3). A person whose request for information is not met may submit a complaint to the Information Commissioner and if the investigation by the Commissioner does not result in release of the information sought, may apply to the court for review of the matter. If the information requested contains personal information about other individuals it is not to be released without consent of the individual concerned except in accord with the Privacy Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. P-21, as amended. If the information is not personal as defined by the latter Act but relates to third parties, disclosure is precluded only in certain circumstances defined by the Access to Information Act. Where it is intended to release information concerning a third party that might contain information exempt from disclosure, the third party is to be informed and given an opportunity to make representations after which, if the head of the institution concerned, having considered the representations, decides to release the information requested, the third party may apply to the court for a review of that decision. It is the last of these circumstances which brings this application before the court under s. 44(1) of the Act.
Facts
[4]
In this case the records in question pertain to Air Atonabee Limited which, since 1984, has carried on business under the firm name and style of City Express. Under the latter name a commuter airline service is operated between various points in southern Ontario, Quebec and the United States with operations centered at the Toronto Island Airport. The company was the first commercial operator of the De Havilland Dash 7 and Dash 8 aircraft in Eastern Canada and its president believes that the company assisted officials of the department in learning about these aircraft and their operation. City Express and the department have dealt with maintenance and inspection matters cooperatively, a relationship which the company's president attributes in large measure to candor in cooperative efforts on both sides and what he and the company have always considered as the confidential nature of their communications. City Express is subject to rigorous inspection procedures carried out by the Aviation Regulation Section of the Department of Transport. That department and the Minister who presides over it have broad powers in respect to airline operations and personnel, aircraft equipment and maintenance under the Aeronautics Act, now R.S.C. 1985, c. A-2, as amended and Regulations under that Act.
[5]
On August 6, 1986, the department notified City Express that a request for access to information had been made, that the information sought had been identified and it included records which originated from the company. The letter attached the "pertinent records" consisting of three one page documents. City Express was advised that the department had reason to believe that the records might contain information as described in s. 28(1)(a), (b) or (c) of the Act, i.e., information exempt from disclosure, but did not have sufficient information to substantiate this and therefore asked the company to assess the documents concerned and clearly indicate how the release of the information could be injurious to the company. The letter included the statement that "Any representation you make will result in a review of our decision to disclose the records". Information about the Access to Information Act and its application was included with specific reference to s. 20(1)(b) relating to information supplied in confidence and to s. 25 which requires disclosure of any part of a record if it can reasonably be severed from any part that contains exempt information. City Express responded by a letter dated August 19, 1986, with reasons why release of the requested information would be contrary to ss. 20(1)(b) and 20(1)(c) of the Act.
[6]
Thereafter the department advised City Express in a letter dated September 25, 1986, that while the Access to Information Act provides for exemption from disclosure of third party records under certain circumstances it also provides that the public interest may be taken into account under s. 20(6) and that in this case the department considered "the public interest outweighs possible injury to your company and it is our intention, therefore, to release records concerning City Express which are pertinent to this access request". The company was advised of their right to apply to the court for a review of that decision pursuant to s. 44 of the Act. The department also advised that in responding to the access request it proposed to include a statement, a draft of which it enclosed with the letter, in order to put into perspective the regulatory system within which the information now proposed to be released had been gathered by the department. It is noted that no opportunity was provided to City Express to respond to considerations of the public interest as a basis for release of information under s. 20(6) of the Act, and that the only opportunity held out for questioning the decision was by application to the court.
[7]
Subsequently, counsel for the applicant was informed that the department had decided to release a number of additional documents considered to be pertinent to the access request and copies of these were provided to counsel. Thereafter on October 14, 1986, City Express applied under s. 44(1) of the Act for review of the decision to disclose the information proposed at that stage to be released.
[8]
There was some delay in filing an affidavit in support of the application and some procedural differences about whether the affidavit being prepared would be filed in confidence in these proceedings. In the course of that process a draft of a proposed confidential affidavit of the president of City Express was made available to counsel for the respondent with a view to seeking consent to an order sealing the affidavit in confidence. Thereafter, by letter dated September 21, 1987, the department advised City Express that it proposed to release additional documents, a decision admittedly made following a review of the draft "confidential" affidavit which had prompted the department to conclude that its previous proposals for meeting the access request were inadequate. In the same letter City Express was notified that, as a result of the review of the additional documents and as a result of information in the draft "confidential" affidavit, the department no longer took the view that any of the provisions of s. 20(1) applied and that it was prepared to release all of the documents excepting some personal information included in them. This additional information was subsequently described in correspondence to the applicant's counsel and copies of it, consisting of eleven different records or parts of records, were provided for the applicant in December 1987.
[9]
Thus, from August 1986 when City Express first heard from the department and was asked to comment on three single-page documents, the department's review of the original access request led to two further decisions, each time to increase the information it proposed to release in response. The total of documents, classed for convenience by agreement of counsel as 36 records, finally comprised 78 pages. With each of these later decisions, City Express was informed and copies of the additional documents proposed to be released were provided. The basis of the department's decision was provided for each of the subsequent occasions but City Express was not invited to comment. Long before the final decision of the department, this application had been initiated for review of the decision to provide information which at the time of filing this application was based on the respondent's assessment of public interest in accord with s. 20(6) of the Act.
[10]
For the record I note that the final version of the confidential affidavit of the president of City Express was filed in April 1988 and with consent of counsel was ordered sealed. A second version of that affidavit omitting reference to specific matters the applicant considered confidential was also filed unsealed in the public record of this application. Similar processes were followed in relation to a supplementary affidavit of the president of the company, and the application record and the memorandum of fact and law of the applicant. In addition, copies of the records in question were filed and with consent were ordered sealed. In the course of the hearing of this matter argument was addressed by counsel for both sides in two phases, first in open court for much of the argument, and second in camera in relation to matters considered by the applicant, to be directly concerned with the records here in issue which to this time have not been disclosed. These procedural arrangements were made to meet the obligations of the court under s. 47(1) to take every reasonable precaution to avoid disclosure to matters in issue until resolution of this application.
Third Party Information And The Access To Information Act
[11]
The Act precludes disclosure to various types of information as specifically defined and also authorizes refusal to disclose information in certain other defined cases. In relation to third party information, that is information relating to a party other than the requestor or a government agency, which is not otherwise exempt, the Access to Information Act exempts from disclosure only certain kinds of information as defined in s. 20, the relevant parts of which for purposes of this case are:
"20(1) Subject to this section, the head of a government institution shall refuse to disclose any record requested under this Act that contains
(a) trade secrets of a third party;
(b) financial, commercial, scientific or technical information that is confidential information supplied to a government institution by a third party and is treated consistently in a confidential manner by the third party;
(c) information the disclosure of which could reasonably be expected to result in material financial loss or gain to, or could reasonably be expected to prejudice the competitive position of, a third party; or
(d) information the disclosure of which could reasonably be expected to interfere with contractual or other negotiations of a third party.
. . . . .
"20(5) The head of a government institution may disclose any record that contains information described in subs. (1) with the consent of the third party to whom the information relates.
"20(6) The head of a government institution may disclose any record requested under this Act, or any part thereof, that contains information described in paragraph (1)(b), (c) or (d) if such disclosure would be in the public interest as it relates to public health, public safety or protection of the environment and, if such public interest in disclosure clearly outweighs in importance any financial loss or gain to, prejudice to the competitive position of or interference with contractual or other negotiations of a third party."
The Act provides for intervention and an opportunity for representations by a third party, not in all cases but in certain cases, as follows. (Section 28, quoted here, is from S.C. 1980-81-82-83, c. 111, Sch. I, in force at the times relevant to this application. In R.S.C. 1985, c. A-1, s. 28(1) to (4) below is s. 27 and s. 28(5) to (8) is s. 28.)
"28(1) Where the head of a government institution intends to disclose any record requested under this Act, or any part thereof, that contains or that the head of the institution has reason to believe might contain
(a) trade secrets of a third party,
(b) information described in paragraph 20(1)(b) that was supplied by a third party, or
(c) information the disclosure of which the head of the institution could reasonably foresee might effect a result described in paragrah 20(1)(c) or (d) in respect of a third party.
the head of the institution shall, subject to subs. (2), if the third party can reasonably be located, within thirty days after the request is received, give written notice to the third party of the request and of the fact that the head of the institution intends to disclose the record or part thereof.
"28(2) Any third party to whom a notice is required to be given under subs. (1) in respect of an intended disclosure may waive the requirement, and where the third party has consented to the disclosure the third party shall be deemed to have waived the requirement.
"28(3) A notice given under subs. (1) shall include
(a) a statement that the head of the government institution giving the notice intends to release a record or a part thereof that might contain material or information described in subs. (1);
(b) a description of the contents of the record or part thereof that, as the case may be, belong to, were supplied by or relate to the third party to whom the notice is given; and
(c) a statement that the third party may, within twenty days after the notice is given, make representations to the head of the government institution that has control of the record as to why the record or part thereof should not be disclosed.
"28(4) The head of a government institution may extend the time limit set out in subs. (1) in respect of a request under this Act where the time limit set out in s. 7 is extended under paragraph 9(1)(a) or (b) in respect of the same request, but any extension under this subsection shall be for a period no longer than the period of the extension under s. 9.
"28(5) Where a notice is given by the head of a government institution under subs. (1) to a third party in respect of a record or a part thereof,
(a) the third party shall, within twenty days after the notice is given, be given the opportunity to make representations to the head of the institution as to why the record or the part thereof should not be disclosed; and
(b) the head of the institution shall, within thirty days after the notice is given, if the third party has been given an opportunity to make representations under paragraph (a), make a decision as to whether or not to disclose the record or the part thereof and give written notice of the decision to the third party.
"28(6) Representations made by a third party under paragraph (5)(a) shall be made in writing unless the head of the government institution concerned waives that requirement, in which case they may be made orally.
"28(7) A notice given under paragraph (5)(b) of a decision to disclose a record requested under this Act or a part thereof shall include
(a) a statement that the third party to whom the notice is given is entitled to request a review of the decision under s. 44 within twenty days after the notice is given; and
(b) a statement that the person who requested access to the record will be given access thereto or to the part thereof unless, within twenty days after the notice is given, a review of the decision is requested under s. 44.
"28(8) Where, pursuant to paragraph (5)(b), the head of a government institution decides to disclose a record requested under this Act or a part thereof, the head of the institution shall give the person who made the request access to the record or the part thereof forthwith on completion of twenty days after a notice is given under that paragraph, unless a review of the decision is requested under section 44."
[12]
It may be worth stressing in passing that the Act does not require notice to a third party before disclosure of information relating to that party except in the circumstances set out in s. 28(1). Where the head of the institution considering all the relevant evidence before her or him concludes that the information requested is not of a character referred to in that section, notice to the third party is not required, will not be ordered by the court and no right to apply for review under s. 44(1) accrues. ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , affd. sub nom.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.)).
[13]
The Act also provides under s. 29(1) for notice to a third party in a case where the head of the institution has refused to disclose information, the requestor has appealed that decision to the Information Commissioner who has investigated and recommended that the information be disclosed and the head of the institution then decides to disclose the information. In that case, as in the case under s. 28 where the Information Commissioner has not been involved and release of third party information is proposed after notice is given under this section, the third party has opportunity to apply to the court for review of the decision to release the information as follows:
"44(1) Any third party to whom the head of a government institution is required under paragraph 28(5)(b) or s. 29(1) to give a notice of a decision to disclose a record or a part thereof under this Act may, within twenty days after the notice is given, apply to the court for a review of the matter.
"44(2) The head of a government institution who has given notice under paragraph 28(5)(b) or s. 29(1) that a record requested under this Act or a part thereof will be disclosed shall forthwith on being given notice of an application made under subs. (1) in respect of the disclosure give written notice of the application to the person who requested access to the record.
"44(3) Any person who has been given notice of an application for a review under subs. (2) may appear as a party to the review."
[14]
For the record I note that in this case the party requesting the records in issue, presumably advised by the respondent of the application filed by City Express, did not seek standing as a party to this review and took no part in the proceedings.
Issues
[15]
The changes in the department's decisions concerning the information to be released in response to the access request and the changes in the basis for its decisions have left differences to be resolved about the issues to be determined in this application.
[16]
It is the applicant's view that the following issues require resolution (as set out in the applicant's memorandum of fact and law):
"(1) Whether the head of an institution is bound by the grounds for disclosure asserted in a notice of decision provided to a third party pursuant to s. 28(5) of the Access to Information Act.
"(2) Whether s. 20(6) can be invoked to disclose third party records that are otherwise exempt under s. 20(1) when no evidence has been presented to show that the public interest in disclosure clearly outweighs in importance any injury to the third party.
"(3) Whether the head of an institution is permitted to release third party information under s. 20(6) when the third party has not been given notice of the intention to release under that provision.
"(4) Whether the records in question are exempt from disclosure under s. 20(1)(b) and/or (c) of the Act.
"(5) Whether release of the records is justified under s. 20(6) of the Act notwithstanding the injury that disclosure could cause to the applicant.
"(6) Whether the records in question are exempt from disclosure under s. 19 of the Act on the basis that they contain personal information.
"(7) Whether any of the documents are subject to severance pursuant to s. 25 of the Act."
[17]
The respondent, on the other hand, submits by memorandum of fact and law that only the following issues are to be determined in this review, on the basis of the evidence adduced by the applicant:
"(a) [whether] the information is financial, commercial, scientific or technical, information, that is confidential information supplied to a government institution by it and consistently treated in a confidential manner by it, [as provided by s. 20(1)(b)] or,
"b) [whether] there is a reasonable probability of material financial loss to it or that its competitive position will be prejudiced if the information contained in the records in question is released, [as provided by s. 20(1)(c)]."
It is the view of the respondent that "there is no issue as to the applicability of s. 20(6), because, having subsequently concluded that the information in the records in question is not subject to s. 20(1), the respondent did not then address again the issue of release in the public interest and has not formed an opinion pursuant to s. 20(6)". No argument is directed by the respondent to the application of s. 20(b) of the Act. Where the respondent has not exercised discretion under s. 20(6) it is not open to the court to consider that "the public interest override", as the section was described in argument, warrants refusal to release the records. ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.)).
[18]
In these circumstances, with the respondent agreeing that its decision, at least the last decision, which is now subject to review in this application is not based on the public interest grounds set out in s. 20(6), the issues raised by the applciant in relation to that section are not in dispute between the parties and do not require resolution in this application. Further, counsel for the respondent acknowledges that to the extent that the records in question contain personal information exempt from disclosure under s. 19 of the Act, the respondent recognizes responsibilities in this regard and would ensure that information so exempt is not disclosed in any records that may be released. I note that undertaking and conclude that there is no issue between the parties in regard to personal information which, if any documents are to be disclosed, would be excised.
[19]
This leaves, as issues to be resolved, those set out in the applicant's list as (1), (4) (which is similar to the respondent's list a) and b)), and 7, namely:
- whether the respondent is bound by his own decision about the basis for release of the documents made prior to the initiation of this appeal;
- what the role of the court is under s. 44 of the Act in relation to the documents in question, and if that role leads to assessing the records in light of the exemptions from disclosure under s. 20(1)(b) or 20(1)(c) how are the records here to be classified;
- what information, if any, would be disclosed in accord with s. 25 of the Act, which provides for the disclosure of any part of a record that does not contain, and can reasonably be severed from any part that contains, any exempt information.
The Basis For Disclosure
[20]
The applicant submits that the respondent is bound by the decision and the announced basis for it as provided in the letter of September 25, 1986, the decision against which this application for review was initiated. It is submitted that decision conceded that the information in issue, at that stage three one-page documents but soon thereafter expanded significantly in scope and number of documents, was within exempt classes of information under s. 20(1). That conclusion is drawn from apparent acceptance of the representations of the applicant that the records were exempt from disclosure under ss. 20(1)(b) and 20(1)(c); if it were otherwise the decision of the respondent could not have been attributed to the "public interest override", in s. 20(6). Having abandoned s. 20(6) as a basis for disclosure, the respondent, it is submitted, cannot deny or challenge the applicability of s. 20(1) and cannot point to a new statutory ground for disclosure after initiation of this application for review.
[21]
For the respondent it is submitted that the applicant has not been prejudiced or misled in a way that precludes fully addressing at the hearing of this matter the issues that it raises. For more than a year before the hearing the applicant was aware of the final decision of the respondent and the reason for it and cannot be said to be prejudiced by it in relation to this application for review. If the respondent were bound by the grounds asserted in the original decision it is submitted this would effectively distort the purpose of the Act as set out in s. 2 and would ignore the right of access as provided by s. 4 for the individual who requested the records.
[22]
The applicant relies upon  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 594; 9 Admin. L.R. 24, at 39, per Strayer, J., and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 87-92 C.C.C., per Jerome, A.C.J. Those cases are the obverse of the situation here and are not persuasive in these circumstances. Both arose under the Privacy Act, S.C. 1980-81-82-83, c. 111, Sch. II, now R.S.C. 1985, c. P-21, as amended, and each was concerned with review of a decision not to release information requested by an individual under that Act. As is the case under the Access to Information Act, the Privacy Act requires, unless there be a reason specified in the Act exempting information from disclosure, that information on government files be disclosed. In the case of the Privacy Act, personal information about an individual is to be disclosed when that person requests it unless the head of the government institution concerned refuses and indicates the statutorily specified ground for refusal. In Ternette and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  the decision refusing to disclose information requested did, as the Act required, specify the grounds for refusal, and the court did not permit the ground specified to be changed after the application for review had been initiated.
[23]
The respondent submits that application of the principle  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  and Davidson by analogy in this case would be "overly legalistic" and would frustrate the purpose of the Act, an approach which the learned Associate Chief Justice Jerome declined to adopt in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . In that case the applicant under s. 44(1), a third party seeking review of a decision to release information, argued that the request for information should be strictly and literally read to relate to certain named records that were originated at a date later than that for which information was requested, that since there were no such records at the relevant time, no other information or record could be disclosed, even that considered by the head of the institution concerned to be as close as was possible in the circumstances to meeting the substance of the request. That submission was not accepted. In my view that case does not directly deal with the issue as raised by the applicant.
[24]
I appreciate the applicant's frustration in this situation where the respondent's decision to disclose records seems to be based at different stages on different grounds. Those changes do not demonstrate exemplary administrative practice, nor do they foster understanding and good will in the necessary continuing relationship between the parties. Nevertheless, I conclude that the respondent ought not to be bound by the grounds identified in the decision letter of September 25, 1986.
[25]
Unlike the situations  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  and Davidson where the court was concerned with decisions not to disclose records and the reasons specified for those decisions, we are here concerned with decisions to disclose records. No reason need be specified for that. The Act requires it. Disclosure is the responsibility of the respondent unless the information requested is among the categories specifically exempt under the Act. Here at the time of the first notification to the applicant in August 1986, the respondent's position that the information sought would be disclosed was qualified by giving the applicant the opportunity, consistent with s. 28 (now ss. 27 and 28) of the Act, to persuade the respondent that the information then in question was within classes exempt from disclosure under s. 20(1). Later, in September 1986, the applicant was notified that the records, soon to be expanded in scope and number of documents, was to be disclosed under the "public interest override" s. 20(6). Finally, in September 1987 the applicant was advised that the respondent planned to release even more information and that none of it was any longer considered to be within the classes of exempt information under s. 20(1). The public interest basis for disclosure under s. 20(6) was abandoned. At least implicitly the information would be disclosed in accord with the requirements of the Act under s. 4 to give to a person who requests it "access to any record under the control of a government institution". In retrospect at least, though it might hardly have appeared so from time to time throughout, the respondent's position has been consistent in that it has a responsibility under the Act to disclose records requested unless that information is exempt from disclosure under the statute.
[26]
That is consistent with the purpose of the Act. Both the Access to Information Act and the Privacy Act are designed in different circumstances to provide access to information maintained by government unless it be within a class specifically exempt from disclosure under the respective acts. To paraphrase Jerome, A.C.J.,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 35 C.C.C.(3d) 91-92, access to information is to be the norm, exemptions are to be confined to situations explicitly set out in each Act; under both statutes the onus of establishing the basis for not disclosing information requested rests with the party who seeks to avoid disclosure.
The Role Of The Court And The Classification
Of The Records Requested
[27]
If the respondent is not to be held to the ground enunciated for disclosure of the records that was set out before this application for review was initiated we are left with the parties essentially in the following positions. The respondent proposes to disclose certain recores, except for personal information, in accord with his responsibilities under the Act. The applicant seeks review of that decision pursuant to s. 44(1) and an order under s. 51 directing the respondent not to disclose the records on the grounds that they contain information exempt from disclosure under ss. 20(1)(b) and 20(1)(c).
[28]
In light of argument in this application, resolution of this aspect requires clarification first of the role of the court. In this regard the applicant invites consideration of this review process, at least in part, by analogy to a normal trial between adversaries. As noted, it is submitted that the respondent cannot challenge the applicability of ss. 20(1)(b) and 20(1)(c), having implicitly accepted this before the application for review was initiated, a submission that I have already dealt with. It is then submitted that the evidence of the applicant consisting of affidavits and cross-examination of the president of City Express, a man with long and extensive experience in the aviation industry, should be given credence in the absence of any evidence at all to dispute it either as to the confidentiality or other qualities of the records in accordance with s. 20(1)(b) or as to the reasonableness of the expectation of financial injury in accordance with s. 20(1)(c). In short, the court is invited to determine the issue essentially on the weight of the evidence introduced in this review proceeding, and in the absence of evidence produced on behalf of the respondent. I do not accept that as a proper basis for resolution of the vital question at issue between the parties. If the applicant has produced all of the evidence before me that is because it is recognized that City Express has the heavy oar; that is, the onus of establishing that the records here in issue are exempt from disclosure under the Act rests on the applicant. (See  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.), and cases there cited by Jerome, A.C.J., at p. 76.) Evidence adduced by the applicant cannot be ignored. It is helpful. But the mere fact that evidence is adduced by or from the applicant alone is not a basis for deciding the issue.
[29]
The respondent submits that this review initiated under s. 44(1) is not an appeal or judicial review in the traditional judicial context, with the court limited to consideration of the evidence before the respondent at the time that the decision to release the records was made. Rather, it is submitted that the court is to undertake a new and independent review of the whole matter, comparable to a trial de novo, and the third party applicant is free to submit new or additional evidence not available to the respondent at the time of his decision. In practical terms the court is left with no alternative in this case for no attempt has been made to provide all of the evidence before the respondent, including such evidence as the text of the access request, the purposes and the full context of the regulatory regime in which the records here in issue were compiled (except for such evidence as appears from the applicant), and the range of information that might possibly respond to the request, a range which appears to have increased significantly over time in view of the respondent in this case.
[30]
That the court should undertake a review of the records in issue and determine what is exempt from disclosure and what is not, and further what information should be severed from exempt information and then released, may well be an onerous task in some cases. Nevertheless, it is consistent with the role which implicitly Parliament has established for the court under the Act. Three sections provide for application to the court for review: by the requestor who is refused information (s. 41), by one who objects to the release of third party information (s. 44), and by the Information Commissioner when his recommendations for disclosure are not met (s. 42). The first two provide for "review of the matter" and the last for "review of any refusal to disclose a record requested". Section 46 provides in the clearest terms that in proceedings arising from any of these applications "the court may ... examine any record ... that is under the control of a government institution and no such record may be withheld from the court on any grounds". Finally, the remedies available by order of the court imply detailed examination, if necessary record by record, by the court, both where there has been refusal to disclose a record on a statutorily specified ground when the court determines that "the head of the institution did not have reasonable grounds on which to refuse to disclose
the record or part thereof
" (s. 50), and where the court determines that the head of an institution who proposes disclosure "is re quired to refuse to disclose
the record or part thereof
" (s. 51) (emphasis added). The reference to parts of records obviously reflects the obligation on the head of the institution concerned under s. 25, where this can be reasonably done, to sever and disclose parts of records where those parts do not contain exempt information.
[31]
The role of the court, to conduct a "review of the matter" de novo, including examination document by document of the records proposed to be disclosed which the applicant third party seeks to have prohibited from disclosure, does not seem to have been thoroughly discussed previously, perhaps because it has been seen to be so obvious in previous cases that no issue was raised about it. That is, however, the role implicit in the statute, consistent with the purposes of the Act and one that the court has adopted in practice in previous cases arising under s. 44. (See e.g.,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  relation to the Act there can no longer be doubt that upon application for review, the court's function is to consider the matter de novo including, if necessary, a detailed review of the records in issue document by document.
[32]
Only in circumstances when disclosure is refused by the head of the government institution concerned, or where proposed release is opposed by a third party, on grounds which do not meet the statutory requirements for refusal might detailed review of the documents be unnecessary.
Sections 20(1)(b) And 20(1)(c)
[33]
The applicant contends that the records proposed to be disclosed by the respondent are exempt from disclosure under ss. 20(1)(b) and 20(1)(c), a view the respondent does not share. Both point to the requirements established by s. 20(1)(b) as elaborated in Montana, supra,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Frosst Canada Inc., supra, and in Canada Packers Inc., supra. Both refer to Canada Packers Inc. in relation to s. 20(1)(c) and each suggests other authorities or other considerations in relation to certain of the criteria set out in these two sections of the statute. I propose to deal with the arguments raised in relation to each of the requirements in light of the developing jurisprudence under the Act.
[34]
In all, there are six criteria set out in the two sections for assessing the records in question. The authorities relied upon by both counsel in relation to s. 20(1)(b), and others, have made clear that exemption from disclosure under that subsection requires that the information in question meet all four of the following criteria: that it be
1) financial, commercial, scientific or technical information,
2) confidential information,
3) supplied to a government institution by a third party, and
4) treated consistently in a confidential manner by the third party.
In the case of s. 20(1)(c) there are two circumstances under either of which, as alternatives to the criteria in other subsections and to each other, information is exempt from disclosure, that is:
1) where the disclosure of the information could reasonably be expected to result in material financial loss or gain to a third party, or
2) where the disclosure of the information could reasonably be expected to prejudice the competitive position of a third party.
Both of these latter circumstances require a reasonable expectation of probable harm (see Canada Packers Inc., supra, per MacGuigan, J., at p. 60) and speculation or mere possibility of harm does not meet that standard (see  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ].
[35]
The criteria under s. 20(1)(b) require examination in turn. As to the first, that the information be financial, commercial, scientific or technical the applicant submits that many of the records here in question contain commercial or technical information. The respondent, however, submits that it is not sufficient if the information merely relates to things financial, commerical, scientific or technical, rather exemption is designed to protect information which has an independent value in relation to such matters, for example a customer list or a property appraisal. In reply the applicant submits that it is not a requirement for classifying information within the terms of this requirement that it have an independent market value the disclosure of which would cause loss to the third party and that such a test was rejected in Montana, supra. Yet in Montana as I read it, a test of that nature was rejected by Jerome, A.C.J., in considering whether the information was confidential, the second of the requirements under s. 20(1)(b), and he did so in the course of discussing jurisprudence which has developed in United States courts in relation to the Freedom of Information Act in that country.
[36]
Nevertheless, I am not prepared to accept the respondent's submission that information must have an independent value, perhaps, from examples suggested, a market value or a cost value to the third party in acquiring it. Information is in my view essentially neutral as to value in those terms. Its value ultimately depends upon the use that may be made of it and its market value will depend upon the market place, who may want it and for what purposes, a value that may fluctuate widely over time. Questions about the application of this criterion appear to have been raised in a few cases but without definitive tests yet evolving. In the circumstances, it seems to me that dictionary meanings provide the best guide and that it is sufficient for purposes of s. 20(1)(b) that the information relate or pertain to matters of finance, commerce, science or technical matters as those terms are commonly understood. Insofar as information of this sort may have a marketable value or its disclosure might cause loss to the third party it would seem that those aspects are protected by Parliament by ss. 20(1)(a), 20(1)(c) and 20(1)(d) of the Act.
[37]
The second requirement under s. 20(1)(b), that the information be confidential, has been dealt with in a number of decisions. These establish that the information must be confidential in its nature by some objective standard which takes account of the content of information, its purposes and the conditions under which it was prepared and communicated (per Jerome, A.C.J., in Montana, supra, at page 25). It is not sufficient that the third party state, without further evidence, that it is confidential (see, e.g., Merck Frosst Canada Inc., supra, Re Noel and Great Lakes Pilotage Authority Ltd. et al. (1987), 20 F.T.R. 257; 45 D.L.R.(4th) 127 (F.C.T.D.)). Information has not been held to be confidential, even if the third party considered it so, where it has been available to the public from some other source ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), and related cases, appeal dismissed with variation as to reasons on other grounds, [1989] 1 F.C. 47 (F.C.A.)), or where it has been available at an earlier time or in another form from government (Canada Packers Inc., supra; Merck Frosst Canada Inc., supra). Information is not confidential where it could be obtained by observation albeit with more effort by the requestor (Noel, supra). As outlined by Jerome, A.C.J., in earlier cases dealing with s. 20(1)(b):
"It is not sufficient that [the applicant] considered the information to be confidential ... It must also have been kept confidential by both parties and ... must not have been otherwise disclosed, or available from sources to which the public has access."
( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 80 C.P.R.(2d) 253 (T.D.), at p. 257  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 91 (F.C.T.D.))
[38]
In some cases reference has been made to United States jurisprudence which has defined commercial or financial information as confidential, for purposes of exemption from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act in that country, where disclosure is likely to have either of the following effects: (1) to impair the government's ability to obtain necessary information in the future or (2) to cause substantial harm to the competitive position of the person from whom the information was obtained (per Tamm, J., in National Parks and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 770). That test has not been adopted, indeed as noted above it has been rejected, in considering s. 20(1)(b) which includes no reference to possible harm from disclosure, a matter dealt with separately in our statute in ss. 20(1)(c) and 20(1)(d). In Noel, supra, Dubé, J., referred to the first aspect of that test and concluded that information obtained as a result of a regulatory obligation on a third party to report information to government could not be deemed to be confidential on the ground that its disclosure would be likely to impair government's ability to acquire the information in future, particularly in circumstances where there were advantages accruing to the third party from reporting.
[39]
In this case the respondent submits that in considering an appropriate objective standard the court, in interpreting the words "confidential information", should look to the test adopted in dealing with an action for breach of confidence. Reference was made to  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; [1963] 3 All E.R. 413 (C.A.), where Lord Greene (at p. 415 All E.R.) reaffirmed the principles that, to found an action for breach of confidence the information in issue must have been imparted in a confidential manner and it must also have "the necessary quality of confidence about it, namely, it must not be something which is public property and public knowledge". Reference was also made to  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Eng. H.C.);  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Ont. H.C.); and to  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  O.R.(2d) 1 (C.A.), leave to appeal to S.C.C. granted Oct. 2, 1987. While those cases are interesting, they deal with equitable relief in relation to alleged unauthorized use of information provided entirely by one party to another in circumstances of confidence which give rise to a fiduciary relationship or a constructive trust. The cases are of limited value in considering what meaning may most appropriately be assigned to confidential information as used in s. 20(1)(b), though they emphasize in another context that confidential information for those purposes does not include matters that are in the public domain or known to the public.
[40]
A more interesting and apt analogy was relied upon by Dubé, J., in Noel, supra, where he applied the test for a confidential record which was adopted in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . There, drawing upon Wigmore on Evidence (3rd Ed., McNaughton Revision, 1961) at para 2285, the court adopted as principles necessary to establish a privilege against the disclosure or unauthorized use of communications, at least for evidence against the party providing them that;
1) they originate in a confidence that they will not be disclosed,
2) the element of confidentiality must be essential to the full and satisfactory maintenance of the relation between the parties,
3) the relation be one which in the opinion of the community ought to be sedulously fostered, and
4) the injury which would inure to the relation by the disclosure of the communications must be greater than the benefit thereby gained for the correct disposal of the litigation.
Like other tests referred to, I find this one helpful though the last of the principles relates particularly to the use of communications as evidence in judicial or quasi-judicial proceedings.
[41]
In this case, in addition to representations about particular records, the applicant submits the following general considerations as indicia that the records here in question are all confidential in nature.
The records here were supplied by City Express or by another third party or were based on information supplied by City Express which has always considered information of this sort to be confidential. (As noted above, the view of the company about the nature of the records cannot in itself be conclusive.)
The information was supplied to government in response to the exercise of statutory authority by officials with the department. (This ground was not accepted as sufficient in itself for considering the information confidential in Noel, supra.)
There was an express undertaking by departmental officials that the information would be treated as confidential. Moreover, the applicant emphasizes that the records in question have not previously been disclosed, and the information contained in them is not otherwise available to the public. (The allegation of an undertaking and the reference to the fact that the records are not otherwise available are not denied but the respondent points out these could not preclude the department from meeting its obligations to provide access to information, at least since the Act came into force in 1982. I accept the respondent's recognition of obligations under the Act and thus that any undertakings by staff of the department do not preclude the respondent from disclosing records requested in accordance with the Act. In light of the purpose of the Act, neither express undertakings of staff nor the previous lack of publication of the records are determinative of whether all the records here are confidential.)
The records by their nature and content reveal sensitive and detailed information about the business operations of City Express, which information has consistently been treated as confidential by the company. (This may be relevant in part in considering the fourth requirement of s. 20(1)(b) to which we will soon turn.)
These submissions are considered by the applicant to meet the requirements for information to be confidential as set out in Montana. In my reading of that case, where on the application of third parties an order was granted not to disclose information supplied to government concerning the finances of various Indian bands, an important element was the fiduciary position of the Minister of Indian Affairs and Northern Development in relation to the information and his responsibilities to the bands affected. That same relationship does not apply in this case.
[42]
My review of the authorities, facilitated in part by submissions of counsel, is undertaken in order to construe the term "confidential information" as used in s. 20(1)(b) in a manner consistent with the purposes of the Act in a case where the records in question under control of a government department consist of documents originating in the department and outside the department. This review leads me to consider the following as an elaboration of the formulation by Jerome, A.C.J., in Montana, supra, that whether information is confidential will depend upon its content, its purposes and the circumstances in which it is compiled and communicated, namely:
a) that the content of the record be such that the information it contains is not available from sources otherwise accessible by the public or that could not be obtained by observation or independent study by a member of the public acting on his own,
b) that the information originate and be communicated in a reasonable expectation of confidence that it will not be disclosed, and
c) that the information be communicated, whether required by law or supplied gratuitously, in a relationship between government and the party supplying it that is either a fiduciary relationship or one that is not contrary to the public interest, and which relationship will be fostered for public benefit by confidential communication.
[43]
In this case there is no dispute that much if not all of the information here in question is not available from sources otherwise accessible by the public and it does not seem to me to be information that could be obtained by observation or independent study by a member of the public. The applicant submits that it considered information it provided was provided in confidence, that it expected the same treatment for information orginating from sources at City Express, and they relied on statements of department staff about the information remaining in confidence. At least in relation to information supplied by City Express, I find that it originated in and was communicated in a reasonable expectation of confidence that it would not be disclosed.
[44]
As to the third element, the relationship between the parties, the president of the applicant company avers to the special relationship of confidence in communications between the parties here and between the airline industry and the department. He underlines the importance of that relationship in an ongoing situation where the department's inspection staff must rely on industry operators for knowledge and experience in the operation of aircraft and where that staff is limited in its resources to oversee an industry that is expanding and diversifying in an era of deregulation. The special relationship between air industry and inspectors is dealt with in recent study of the Law Reform Commission of Canada, Inspection: A Case Study and Selected References, by John C. Clifford (1988), which generally supports the applicant's view of the current relationship. This Report, based in part on substantial services field study of the air inspection services of the respondent's department, includes the following pertinent passages at page 17:
"The author accompanied airworthiness inspectors during routine inspections of aircraft and conversations with air crew. One inspector constantly stressed the importance of relations with airline staff, and underlined the fact that airworthiness inspectors are mainly interested in getting things corrected. This is accomplished by maintaining a strong network of contacts in the industry, checking with manuals, and generally using every available source of information. The airworthiness inspector ... noted that many problems followed from the use of incomplete reports. Additionally, the airworthiness inspector expressed his difference of opinion respecting enforcement: specifically, he did not think it was always appropriate to follow up with enforcement measures when, for example, 'snags' were reported by AMEs. He outlined their responsibilities, and noted the importance of interpersonal relations and shared backgrounds.
. . . . .
"The airworthiness inspectors indicated that relations with the AMEs were very important because information about maintenance problems was typically passed on in confidence to the airworthiness inspector. As well, remote sources of problems were discussed."
(Note: AMEs, referred to in these passages, are aircraft maintenance engineers, private sector actors, whether employees of private firms or self-employed)
[45]
It is implied from argument of the applicant that the relationship of the parties in this regulatory regime is, or has been, one of confidence that warrants exemption from disclosure of all the records maintained by government arising from this relationship. The relations between them may change if records are disclosed in this or any other case of a request for access to them. Yet Parliament has decided that access should be provided, as ss. 2 and 4 of the Act make abundantly clear, unless the information requested is specifically exempt from disclosure under the Act or exempt under regulations as the Governor in Council may provide in accordance with the Act. In the final analysis if the relationship between the parties here, one not generically different from many other regulatory relationships, is to be treated as one of confidence and the records arising in it are to be wholly exempt from disclosure, that decision rests with Parliament or with the executive under the Act, not with the courts.
[46]
While I am not persuaded that the relationship here is one of special confidence in which all records should be exempt from disclosure and while it is not one of a fiduciary nature as in Montana, supra, it is consistent with the public interest and the relationship would be fostered for the benefit of the public, in my view, by treating as confidential those communications which originate with the applicant where the applicant has considered them confidential. In this case the third party would be encouraged to be open and frank with inspectors if its understanding about the restricted purposes and circulation of its communications is recognized and respected. Where the records are from department sources, not otherwise exempt from disclosure under s. 20(1), the general purpose of the Act, which identifies as a public interest given priority by Parliament the provision of access of government controlled records, should be given effect unless the relationship between the third party and government is exceptional and warrants treating the records as confidential. Thus, for records originating in departmental responsibilities, compiled by public officers at public expense, in this as in other regulatory regimes, unless there be reasons to support an exceptional conclusion that the public interest is better served by treating the records as confidential, the records would not be considered confidential for purposes of the Act. This, of course, suggests there may be public interests taken into account in assessing whether records are to be considered confidential, aside from the special public interests identified in s. 20(6) which may be considered by the head of the government institution concerned. Yet classifying information as confidential because of an identified public interest would not preclude its release under s. 20(6) in a proper case.
[47]
The third requirement under s. 20(1)(b) is that the information be supplied to a government institution by the third party. In this case some of the documents in question clearly originated with and were supplied by City Express, the third party applicant. The applicant submits that the others were either supplied by another third party to the department or even if they are records compiled by departmental officers these records were directly based on information supplied by City Express to the department. The respondent submits that records produced by public employees as to actions taken by them do not constitute records supplied by a third party. It is submitted that Canada Packers Inc., supra, makes clear that records compiled by public employees from their own observations in inspecting records, facilities or equipment do not constitute records supplied by a third party. The difference between the parties lies in relation to documents which on their face appear as department documents compiled by public officers reporting on their actions or observations from inspections but which the applicant contends are based on information provided by City Express in the cooperative relationship that had developed between staff of the two parties.
[48]
In my view, where the record consists of the comments or observations of public inspectors based on their review of the records maintained by the third party at least in part for inspection purposes, the principle established by Canada Packers Inc., supra, applies and the information is not to be considered as provided by the third party. In any other case where there is real doubt about the origin of information leading to the records in issue, I would be prepared to resolve that doubt as urged by the applicant, that is, that the information originates with the applicant City Express who is responsible in every way and at all times for all operations of the company, whereas inspection staff are not, so far as I am informed, exclusively engaged at all times in supervision or inspection of the applicant's operations nor are they responsible for those operations. In this case, on review of the records in issue there are no instances where reliance on such a presumption is necessary.
[49]
The final requirement under s. 20(1)(b) is that the records in question be treated consistently in a confidential manner by the third party. None of the documents comprising the records in issue are marked confidential though that in itself may not be significant. The affidavit evidence of the president of City Express is that records of this sort compiled in the dealings between an airline company and department inspection staff have consistently been treated in a confidential manner by City Express, and others in the industry in similar circumstances, and by the department. There is no dispute about the fact that information in the records have not been disclosed previously and has not otherwise been made available to the public by either the applicant or the respondent. Further, the applicant's president avers that information in the records is sensitive and detailed information about the business operations of City Express and that this information has been treated consistently as confidential by the company. There is no challenge to this statement of the company's practice. At least in relation to the documents provided by the third party here, it seems to me that its practice in treating those as confidential should be respected.
[50]
Accepting that documents originating with the applicant have consistently been treated as confidential, application of the principles outlined for considering information as confidential under s. 20(1)(b) in part by reference to the source of the records in issue is consistent with that subsection and the purposes of the Act. In this case it means that some documents originating with the department which invite or require response by the applicant may be disclosed and the response of the applicant which completes the full record would not be disclosed unless the applicant agrees. Sometimes the complete record here is a comment or directive from the department with a response on the reverse side of a form, sometimes the response is by separate communication from the applicant. The record originating with the department does not automatically take on the characteristic of confidentiality from that quality, determined by the applicant, of the response record. The applicant third party is free to decide whether it will permit disclosure of its responses, which heretofore it has consistently treated as provided in confidence, and if that is permitted the respondent may then disclose that response in accord with s. 20(5).
[51]
There are two subsidiary aspects related to its concerns about confidentiality raised by the applicant. One relates to other third parties and their interests. Some of the records here in issue originate with other third parties and in other cases the interests of other third parties might be adversely affected, it is suggested, by disclosure of the records. So far as is known other third parties associated with the records in either of these ways have not been involved in this process of determining access to these records. The interests of other third parties are matters to be of concern to the head of the ministry. Even if other third party interests may be involved that does not provide a basis for classifying information here in issue as confidential in the relationship between the department and City Express.
[52]
A second aspect involves the concept of fairness in dealings between the ministry and City Express. It is presented by proposed disclosure of intra-departmental records, compiled without input or opportunity to comment by the company though the records relate directly to it. The applicant was ignorant of some records or parts of records now proposed to be disclosed until copies were made available to it following the access request to which the department seeks to respond. It is not surprising that the applicant feels unfairly treated by the proposed disclosure of information from government records about the applicant that were unknown to it before the request and on which there was no opportunity to comment. While this would seem to be a void insofar as legislated responsibility and rights under the Act are concerned, it is one that Parliament could address by amendment. It is also one that the department concerned can in future avoid simply by ensuring that internal records it compiles in its ongoing regulatory process are simultaneously provided by copy to any third parties whose interests are dealt with in the records so that they may, if they wish, respond or comment. That would be good manners. It would provide a measure of fairness if comment or response from the party affected were retained on government files with internal records relating to that party. That in turn ought to foster understanding in an ongoing regulatory regime. In this case, that was not the practice and internal departmental documents about City Express operations are not confidential under s. 20(1)(b) and the only basis for exempting them from disclosure here would be under s. 20(1)(c).
[53]
We turn now to the requirements of s. 20(1)(c). Here both parties point to the decision in Canada Packers Inc., supra, where, in the words of MacGuigan, J.A., the exceptions to access require "a reasonable expectation of probable harm". The applicant suggests that the decision of the Australian Administrative Appeals Tribunal in Re Actors' Equity Association of Australia and Australian Broadcasting Tribunal (1985), 7 A.L.D. 584, at 590, offers guidance about the meaning of a "reasonable expectation". In that case the tribunal, considering s. 43(1)(c)(i) of the Australian Freedom of Information Act, 1982, dealt with the phrase "which would, or could reasonably be expected to, unreasonably affect" a third party's lawful business or professional affairs. The Tribunal in that case said:
"... we are in the field of predictive opinion. The question is whether there is a reasonable expectation of adverse effect. It is to that question that the witnesses' evidence had to be directed, and their assertions are incapable of proof in the ordinary way. What there must be is a foundation for a finding that there is an expectation of adverse effect that is not fanciful, imaginary or contrived, but rather is reasonable, that is to say based on reason, namely 'agreeable to reason; not irrational, absurd or ridiculous' (Shorter Oxford Dictionary)."
The respondent rightly points out that the Tribunal there was concerned with interpreting the Australian act which is different from the Access to Information Act. Nevertheless, the definition there pointed to seems reasonable, though it is not particularly helpful in resolving the differences between the parties in the application of s. 20(1)(c).
[54]
Here the applicant submits that the information proposed to be released is likely to be misunderstood by the general public for it is highly technical in nature and it is incomplete for it is only selected parts of an ongoing process of communications, a dialogue, between the parties. It is said that the information proposed to be released does not provide appropriate contextual or explanatory background to be properly understood. The applicant objects to a brief explanatory note proposed by the respondent to be disclosed with the records and submits that only by providing even more information of the same sort which would contain matters the applicant considers confidential would its position be fairly presented in relation to some of the records. Many of the records relate to matters arising in the inspection process which involves not mere supervision and enforcement but service and a sharing of information in a regime where both parties have different but shared responsibilities for overall safety in operations. While the applicant has indicated throughout that it does not consider that any of the records, properly understood in context, raise issues of safety in its operations, it is concerned that the opposite will appear to be the case to the uninformed reader. It points to a decision set out in a copy of a letter from the United States Federal Aviation Agency declining to reveal to a requestor, under the Freedom of Information Act there, information collected from the industry about certain technical matters, on the ground that the information was susceptible of being misconstrued by members of the public as safety related. It is pointed out by the respondent that the information there in question differed from most if not all of the information here in issue, and that the decision referred to was that of the agency and was subject to appeal to the court.
[55]
The applicant's apprehension gives rise to three serious concerns. First, it is urged that there is a reasonable expectation of harm to the applicant, with a smaller and still developing operation in a highly competitive industry and serving a highly competitive market, where a modest decline in passenger traffic, a mere one percent, would have serious financial implications for the company. The applicant refers to trade journal reports provided by it about experience of two airlines in the United States, which reportedly faced a decline in passenger traffic, in an era of increasing growth for others, following news accounts of concentrated ramp inspections by government regulators. The respondent notes that the inspections there were of a different nature and for different purposes than the regular ongoing inspection process that resulted in much, if not all, of the records in this case. Nevertheless, the applicant points to the experience of one of the U.S. companies that had its bond ratings decline following news of the inspections, and its decline in passenger traffic persisted, for some time at least, even though the ramp inspection process resulted in a satisfactory outcome. There is a further particular concern of the applicant arising from some intra-department records of which it was unaware until copies were provided to it in connection with the access request here. This relates to comments of department officers in the nature of general opinion which might have legal implications but did not result in any departmental action and which were not brought to the applicant's attention previously.
[56]
Second, the applicant expresses a concern that the records here, if disclosed, might be expected to be used to adversely affect the company's interests by certain parties. Those parties include competitors, persons knowledgable about the technical information included in the records, who could by interpretation and with the use of other information available to them estimate with reasonable perception major cost factors borne in some of the applicant's maintenance and other operations. Other information of special interest to competitors, it is submitted, relates to key personnel matters. These factors may be important in gauging the applicant's ability to deal with competitors' pricing and other initatives. Other parties adverse to the interests of the applicant include individuals and organizations that have been concerned with airport operations in Toronto, about which there has been ongoing public discussions and debate. Countering any stepped-up programme adverse to the applicant's use of facilities in that city, as in any other, would, it is submitted, result in expense and possible substantial costs for City Express.
[57]
These concerns are even more serious in regard to information, not proposed to be released by the respondent, which the applicant considers would more fairly present its position in relation to certain of the inspection records in issue. While I appreciate the applicant's concern about the fairness of any revelation from records released about it, we are not here concerned with records other than those the respondent proposes to release. If additional documents are considered by the applicant as essential to fairly portray its position it will have to decide, if public attention is ever drawn to any documents that may be disclosed, whether the company will then provide further documents from its own records to counter any public misunderstandings.
[58]
The applicant's third concern, expressed with reference to certain of the records here in issue, is that by referring to specific identified aircraft disclosure of those records may adversely affect the market or rental value of some of its principal assets or its relationship with suppliers. This concern, like that about possible use by competitors of specific technical or personnel information in the records, does relate directly to the assets or the competitive position of City Express.
[59]
To all of the applicant's concerns the respondent submits that they do not provide more than mere speculation as to the future. They are said to be based on an expectation that is not reasonable, that there will be widespread misunderstanding created by disclosure in this case or deliberate distortion of the information in ways that would lead to harm for the applicant. It is submitted that the exemption in s. 20(1)(c) was not intended to prevent the disclosure of information which is not in itself harmful but requires some intervening misunderstanding or distortion for the harm to result. I do not accept the last submission because, as earlier suggested, information in itself is neutral; aside from trade secrets which are protected from disclosure its release could not cause harm. The information must be used in some way that causes harm. One must accept that Parliament, in s. 20(1)(c) assumed that information disclosed would be used. The requirement of that subsection is whether, assuming use of the information, its disclosure would give rise to a reasonable expectation of probable harm.
[60]
It is true that the records arise from inspection of operations by the government agency with responsibility for safety standards in air transport and that if disclosed the records will not provide a complete picture. The accurate picture is, of course, the applicant's apparent record for safety in its operations, which the respondent acknowledges and which is evident from its continuing operation under license without any major safety incident. The public view of the applicant's concern for safety in its operations depends ultimately on its own performance, not upon the results recorded in routine inspection. Moreover, if disclosure of records were to lead to any general public misunderstanding about safety in operations the respondent will have some responsibility to react to that, otherwise the inspection system itself may be discredited in the long run.
[61]
Having considered submissions of counsel in relation to the application of s. 20(1)(c) to the records here in issue, I conclude that apprehensions about general minunderstandings that might arise from disclosure, either concerning safety in its operations or about use by persons adverse in interest do not raise more than speculation about probable harm. I am not persuaded that disclosure raises a reasonable expectation of probable harm in the context of possible general misunderstandings.
[62]
Particular concerns of the applicant about disclosure of certain matters are, however, worth special consideration, in my view. These matters include comment about personnel matters, as well as personal information which is exempt from disclosure. They also include references to identified particular aircraft, to particular processes involving other third parties in the applicant's operations or other identified information that may be used by competitors to the disadvantage and harm of the applicant, and general opinions of department staff with possible legal implications which opinions were not acted upon by the department and were not previously brought to the attention of the applicant. It is my conclusion that disclosure of these types of information, identified as of particular concern to the applicant, should be exempt from disclosure because disclosure, in the terms of s. 20(1)(c), could reasonably be expected to result in material financial loss or to prejudice the competitive position of the applicant in this case.
Severance: Sections 25 And 51
[63]
Counsel for the applicant urged that consideration be given to the reasonable expectation of harm from disclosure not only in regard to individual records but also to the total collection of records that may be disclosed. In the circumstances of this case it was argued that severance of exempt portions of the records and disclosure of the rest would not be reasonable. It seems to me the answer to these submissions is clear from the Act itself. Access is to be provided except for those records or portions of records which are exempt under the Act.
[64]
Section 25 of the Act provides as follows:
"Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, where a request is made to a government institution for access to a record that the head of the institution is authorized to refuse to disclose under this Act by reason of information or other material contained in the record, the head of the institution shall disclose any part of the record that does not contain, and can reasonably be severed from any part that contains, any such information or material."
[65]
Reflecting the administrator's obligation under this section and consistent with the purposes set out in s. 2, the court has an obligation under s. 51 as follows:
"Where the court determines, after considering an application under s. 44, that the head of a government institution is required to refuse to disclose a record or part of a record, the court shall order the head of the institution not to disclose the record or part thereof or shall make such other order as the court deems appropriate."
[66]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.), Jerome, A.C.J., referred to the matter of severance under this Act and the Privacy Act in these terms (at pp. 558-9):
"... Parliament seems to have intended that severance of exempt and nonexempt portions be attempted only when the result is a reasonable fulfillment of the purposes of these statutes. ...
. . . . .
"... Disconnected snippets of releasable information taken from otherwise exempt passages are not, in my view, reasonably severable."
In that case information relating to opinion about individuals and their training, personality, experience or competence was held to be personal information exempt from disclosure and the record there in question was ordered to be disclosed subject to severance and deletion from it of entire passages including such personal information in order to protect the privacy of individuals.
[67]
In Montana, supra (18 F.T.R. at pp. 26-27), Jerome, A.C.J., declined to sever from the records there in question, which he held contained confidential information exempt from disclosure, information which the applicant third party conceded was not confidential. In that case the portions of records that might have been severed were minimal portions of the total information contained in the records and were available from published public sources. The information was found not to be reasonably severable where
"To attempt to comply with s. 25 would result in the release of an entirely blacked-out document with, at most, two or three lines showing. Without the context of the rest of the statement, such information would be worthless. The effort such severance would require on the part of the department is not reasonably proportionate to the quality of access it would provide."
[68]
In this case counsel for the respondent undertakes that any personal information exempt from disclosure under the Act will be deleted from any records before disclosure. My review of the records here leads me to conclude that severance can be done reasonably, deleting exempt information and disclosing all the rest. In the conclusion which follows documents classified in categories B(1), (2), (3), (4) and (5) are in accord with my conclusions about exempt information.
Conclusion
[69]
I have reviewed the records here in issue in light of the requirements and principles set out above in relation to exemptions from disclosure under ss. 20(1)(b) and 20(1)(c), and in relation to the court's obligation to consider severance and disclosure of any information in the records that is not exempt where this can reasonably be done.
[70]
After consideration of the submissions of both parties, in light of the principles and conclusions set out earlier, my conclusions about the records here in issue, identified by reference to the numbers assigned to them by counsel for both parties, are as follows.
A. Records 28 and 29, the disclosure of which was acknowledged by counsel for the applicant to be without objection, will be disclosed.
B. All other records will be disclosed in toto with the following exceptions.
(1) Documents orginating with the applicant which I find it has consistently treated as confidential will not be disclosed, even those which respond to records originating with the department, unless the applicant agrees to their disclosure, including records numbered
3 (page 2), 6, 7, 10, 13, 14 (page 2), 15 (pages 2 and 4), 16, 17 (page 2), 20, 24, 25 (pages 2 and 4), 26 (pages 2 and 4), 30, (page 2), 31 (page 1).
(2) Documents originating in the department which should be considered in toto as exempt in accord with s. 20(1)(c) and because they relate to important personnel matters and contain personal information, including records numbered
1, 5
(3) Documents originating in the department which require severance of portions before disclosure to exclude information that is exempt under s. 20(1)(c), including records numbered
18 - page 3, severing and omitting 5th and 6th last lines of handwriting not including signature;
27 - severing and omitting any reference to another corporate third party and its dealings with the applicant, e.g., in items 5, 7, 8, 10, 11;
34 - severing and omitting on page 1, lines 1 to 5 after the heading "Maintenance Management"; and on page 2, paragraph 2(a) in its entirety and in paragraph 2(b) the 3rd, 4th, 5th and 6th words after the words "Bonded Stores";
36 - severing and deleting on page 2 paragraph 2(1). If the applicant agrees to disclosure of any records listed in B(1) above which records contain information complementary or otherwise corresponding to the specific references to be severed and deleted in accord with this classification B(3), comparable deletions shall be made in records agreed to be disclosed.
(4) All documents to be disclosed, including any identified in B(1) above which the applicant may agree to be disclosed, shall have severed and omitted any reference identifying particular aircraft reported upon in those records; if necessary to make intelligible the records disclosed any such reference may be replaced by "[aircraft]".
(5) All documents to be disclosed shall have severed and omitted any reference to any personal information, as counsel for the respondent has undertaken would be done, before disclosure.
[71]
In the result the following records or parts of records will be disclosed, a list that may be expanded if the applicant agrees that any of the records listed in B(1) above be disclosed, subject to severance and omission of those portions set out in B(3), (4) and (5) above:
2, 3 (page 1), 4, 8, 9, 11, 12, 14 (page 1), 15 (pages 1 and 3), 17 (page 1), 18, 19, 21, 22, 23, 25 (pages 1 and 3), 26 (pages 1 and 3), 27, 28, 29, 30 (page 1), 31 (page 2), 32, 33, 34, 35, 36.
[72]
An order will issue under s. 51 of the Act directing the respondent not to disclose those records or parts of records identified above by categories B(1), (2), (3), (4) and (5) except that any records identified in B(1) which the applicant agrees be disclosed may also be disclosed, provided agreement of the applicant is given to the respondent within the time limited for appeal of the order made in this application.
[73]
As for this application, it is allowed in part as indicated, with costs to the applicant.
[74]
Because some of the records or portions of records in issue will not be disclosed, I direct that the documents and records filed herein by the parties on a confidential basis and ordered filed in sealed envelopes continue to be so filed. These would be dealt with at the direction of the Court of Appeal in the event an appeal is taken against the order made in this application, and if no appeal be taken then they would be retained as filed and sealed on a confidential basis unless otherwise ordered by this court.
[75]
Counsel for the applicant is asked to submit a draft order for my signature, in accordance with these reasons, pursuant to paragraph 2(b) of rule 337 and rule 324 of the Federal Court Rules, after approval of the draft as to form by counsel for the respondent.
[76]
I suggest that counsel for both parties seek to agree on the text of an explanatory statement that may put in appropriate context the records to be disclosed. The Act does not require one. The applicant here objects to the draft originally proposed by the respondent but also objects that the records proposed to be disclosed do not put those records in proper context. If agreement is not possible within the time limited for appeal of the order made in this application the respondent may determine whether any such state ment should accompany disclosure.
Application allowed in part.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/slg
[End of document]