[1]
Blanchard, J.
: This is an appeal from the Order of Prothonotary Roger Lafrenière dated June 20, 2002, in which the Prothonotary dismissed a motion on behalf of the Applicant for an order that "the true and correct opponent in this proceeding and before the Registrar is and always has been "Mattel Inc." and this proceeding shall continue with "Mattel, Inc." as the Applicant.
[2]
In his order, the Prothonotary stated:
"... the Applicant having failed to establish that the relief requested, which is essentially to correct an alleged misnomer of the opponent's name before the Registrar of Trade Marks, is obtainable by way of interlocutory motion;
"AND UPON being satisfied, at this stage of the proceeding, that there is no need to amend the style of cause, the Applicant not alleging misjoinder;
"IT IS ORDERED THAT:
1. The motion is dismissed, without prejudice to 'Mattel, Inc.' continuing as Applicant in this proceeding."
[3]
The Applicant argues that the Prothonotary erred in law in dismissing the Applicant's motion and in concluding that the relief was not available by way of interlocutory motion.
[4]
The Applicant essentially argues that his motion was properly before the Court in that the main proceeding in which the motion was brought is an appeal under section 56 of the
Trade Marks Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. T-13. Section 56(5) of the
Trade Marks Act
, provides that the Federal Court may exercise any discretion vested in the Registrar of Trade Marks.
"56(1) An appeal lies to the Federal Court from any decision of the Registrar under this Act within two months from the date on which notice of the decision was dispatched by the Registrar or within such further time as the Court may allow, either before or after the expiration of the two months.
. . . . .
"(5) On an appeal under subsection (1), evidence in addition to that adduced before the Registrar may be adduced and the Federal Court may exercise any discretion vested in the Registrar."
[5]
The Applicant further submits that Regulation 40 of the
Canadian Trade Marks Regulations
(1994) SOR/96-195, as amended SOR/99-292, provides that amendments to a statement of opposition may be allowed with leave of the Registrar of Trade Marks and on such terms as the Registrar determines to be appropriate. Consequently, the Applicant argues that if the Registrar could exercise his discretion on an interlocutory basis in the opposition proceeding, similarly, the Federal Court may exercise its discretion on an interlocutory basis in the appeal proceeding.
[6]
I do not agree with the Applicant's submission. The relief being sought is in the nature of a declaration correcting an alleged misnomer of the opponent's name before the Registrar of Trade Marks. I am of the view such a remedy is in the nature of an extraordinary remedy provided for in section 18(1) of the
Federal Court Act
. Section 18(3) of the
Act
provides that such remedies "... may be obtained only on an application for judicial review made under section 18.1".
[7]
In the case before me, no such application for judicial review has been commenced which would allow the Court to consider granting the interlocutory relief sought. The main application is an appeal under section 56 of the
Trade Marks Act
and not an application for judicial review as contemplated under section 18(1) of the
Federal Court Act
.
[8]
I am also of the view that the extraordinary remedy sought, cannot be properly characterized as interim relief, the purpose of which is to preserve or restore the status quo. The remedies identified in section 18(1) of the
Federal Court Act
, contemplate providing the Applicant with a remedy, not interim relief pending a final determination. ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.))
[9]
Discretionary orders of prothonotaries ought not to be disturbed on appeal unless they are wrong, in the sense that the exercise of the discretion was based upon a wrong principle or misapprehension of the facts, or they raised questions vital to the final issue of the matter, in which case the reviewing judge ought to exercise his discretion de novo. (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.)).
[10]
I have considered the evidence before the Court and I have reviewed the Order of the Prothonotary and in particular the above cited paragraphs of the Order. On the evidence, I cannot find that this order is clearly wrong. The Prothonotary did not err in the exercise of his discretion based on a wrong principle of law or upon a misapprehension of the facts.
[11]
In conclusion, I would have exercised my discretion in the same manner as did the Prothonotary.
[12]
The appeal will therefore be dismissed.
ORDER
[13]
THIS COURT ORDERS THAT:
The appeal of the Order of Prothonotary Lafrenière dated June 20, 2002 is dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.
Editor: Angela E. McKay/pdk
[End of document]