[1]
Cullen, J.
: This is an application for judicial review of a decision dated August 5, 1994 of Albert S. Burke, appointed as an adjudicator pursuant to s. 93 of the
Public Service Staff Relations Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. P-35, as amended ("the
Act
"). The decision allowed the grievance presented by the respondent. The applicant seeks an order quashing and setting aside the decision of the adjudicator.
Facts
[2]
The respondent is employed by Transport Canada (Canadian Coast Guard) at St. John's, Newfoundland, in the general technical group. The Public Service Alliance of Canada ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ) is the collective bargaining agent for the respondent.
[3]
On January 8, 1993, the respondent was informed of a change in his shift schedule, altering his evening shift on February 17, 1993 to a midnight shift on February 23, 1993. The change of shift eliminated the respondent's day of rest on February 23, 1993. The change was made to accommodate the annual leave of another employee. On January 25, 1993, the respondent presented a grievance regarding the employer's decision to change his shift.
[4]
Pursuant to s. 92 of the
Public Service Staff Relations Act
, the matter was referred to adjudication. At the adjudication hearing, the respondent testified that the elimination of his day of rest on February 23, 1993 meant that he would have had only two consecutive days of rest instead of three. He had planned to visit his parents on these three days of rest and it was approximately a six-hour drive to visit them. The respondent further testified that he was not contacted by the employer prior to the receipt of the memorandum explaining the change in shift and no action was taken by the employer after he raised his concerns about the shift.
[5]
At the hearing, the respondent argued that article 16.05 of the Group Specific Agreement between Treasury Board and PSAC requires the employer to consult with employees before making scheduling changes to accommodate other employees' annual leave requests. The applicant maintained that article 16.05 dealt solely with the obligation of the employer to grant an employee's request for vacation leave. It imposed no obligation on the employer to consult other employees before granting such a request or scheduling shifts to accommodate it.
Article 16.05
[6]
Article 16.05 of the Group Specific Agreement which was interpreted by the adjudicator reads as follows:
"
Scheduling of Vacation Leave with Pay
"16.05 In scheduling vacation leave with pay to an employee the Employer shall, subject to the operational requirements of the service, make every reasonable effort;
(a) to grant the employee his or her vacation leave during the fiscal year in which it is earned, if so requested by the employee no later than June 1;
(b) to comply with any request made by an employee before January 31 that the employee be permitted to use in the following fiscal year any period of vacation leave of four (4) days or more earned by the employee in the current year;
(c) to ensure that approval of an employee's request for vacation leave is not unreasonably denied;
(d) to schedule vacation leave on an equitable basis and when there is no conflict with the interests of the Employer or the other employees, according to the wishes of the employee."
The Adjudicator's Decision
[7]
The adjudicator concluded that the applicant's failure to consult with the respondent prior to making the scheduling change constituted a violation of the collective agreement. The adjudicator stated:
"Clause 16.05(a), (b), (c) and (d) of the grievor's collective agreement outlines what procedure the employer and employee must follow when requesting or granting vacation leave (annual leave). Clause 16.05 also puts the onus on the employer to make every reasonable effort to grant that leave, and not to unreasonably deny it. However, paragraph (d) of 16.05 also builds in protection for the employer and other employees when vacation leave is being granted to ensure that it will not conflict with the interest of those other employees.
. . . . .
"The employer must look at all options open to it when vacation leave is requested; changing the shift schedule of another employee is one option; however, if there is a justifiable conflict of interest involved, then that in itself does not justify refusing the requested vacation leave as there may be other ways of accommodating an employee's request for leave, for example, a shift change, overtime and so forth.
. . . . .
"The employer should have enquired of other employees including the grievor, who would be affected, as to whether there was a reasonable conflict of interest, that would justify not changing their schedule to accommodate the annual leave. I therefore declare that failure to do so was a violation of clause 16.05(d). To that extent, the grievor is allowed."
Issues
[8]
The only substantive issue that this court need determine is whether the adjudicator erred in holding that the applicant was obliged by article 16.05 to consult the respondent before altering his shift schedule to accommodate another employee's vacation leave. However, before addressing this issue, the court will consider the appropriate standard of review of the adjudicator's decision.
Standard Of Review
[9]
The
Public Service Staff Relations Act
does not contain a privative clause. [See footnote 1] The Federal Court of Appeal in the decision of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), declined to comment on the appropriate standard of review of the amended
Public Service Staff Relations Act
. Mr. Justice Hugessen stated:
"We do not find it necessary to determine what standard of review should be applied to the Public Service Staff Relations Board following the repeal of the former privative clause by the
Public Service Reform Act
. Assuming, without deciding, that the Board is now entitled to no more than minimal deference we are all of the view that the decisions here in issue are beyond reproach on any of the grounds listed in s. 18.1(4) of the
Federal Court Act
. We would add that the decisions, involving as they do the determination of appropriate bargaining units, which is the very heartland of the Board's expertise, are entitled to considerably more than such minimal deference."
Prior to reviewing the decision of the arbitrator in the case at bar, it is for this court to determine the appropriate standard of review.
[10]
The grounds of review in applications for judicial review to the Trial Division are set out in s. 18.1(4) of the
Federal Court Act
which provides as follows:
"18.1(4) the Trial Division may grant relief under subs. (3) if it is satisfied that the federal board, commission or other tribunal
(a) acted without jurisdiction, acted beyond its jurisdiction or refused to exercise its jurisdiction;
(b) failed to observe a principle of natural justice, procedural fairness or other procedure that it was required by law to observe;
(c) erred in law in making a decision or an order, whether or not the error appears on the face of the record;
(d) based its decision or order on an erroneous finding of fact that it made in a perverse or capricious manner or without regard for the material before it;
(e) acted, or failed to act, by reason of fraud or perjured evidence; or
(f) acted in any other way that was contrary to law."
In the case at bar, it is necessary to determine the standard of review applicable to the ground set out in paragraph (c) with respect to errors of law.
[11]
In arguments before me, counsel were in agreement on a number of issues concerning the standard of review. First, they agreed that the privative clause, formerly contained in s. 101 of the
Act
, no longer applied. Second, and arising from the fact that the privative clause no longer applied, counsel were in agreement that the standard of review to be applied was not "patently unreasonable" as enunciated by Cory, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . Finally, both counsel endorsed the "spectrum" approach described by Iacobucci, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  B.C.A.C. 1; 75 W.A.C. 1. To the court was left the task of determining where along the "spectrum" the decision of the adjudicator fell.
[12]
In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, at pp. 589-591  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , Iacobucci, J., described the "spectrum" along which decisions could fall and the corresponding standard of review:
"From the outset, it is important to set forth certain principles of judicial review. There exist various standards of review with respect to the myriad of administrative agencies that exist in our country. The central question in ascertaining the standard of review is to determine the legislative intent in conferring jurisdiction on the administrative tribunal. In answering this question, the courts have looked at various factors. Included in the analysis is an examination of the tribunal's role or function. Also crucial is whether or not the agency's decisions are protected by a privative clause. Finally, of fundamental importance, is whether or not the question goes to the jurisdiction of the tribunal involved.
"Having regard to the large number of factors relevant in determining the applicable standard of review, the courts have developed a spectrum that ranges from the standard of reasonableness to that of correctness. Courts have also enunciated a principle of deference that applies not just to the facts as found by the tribunal, but also to the legal questions before the tribunal in the light of its role and expertise. At the reasonableness end of the spectrum, where deference is at its highest, are those cases where a tribunal protected by a true privative clause, is deciding a matter within its jurisdiction and where there is no statutory right of appeal. See
Canadian Union of Public Employees, Local 963 v. New Brunswick Liquor Corp.
, [1979] 2 S.C.R. 227;
U.E.S., Local 298 v. Bibeault
, [1988] 2 S.C.R. 1048, at p. 1089 (
Bibeault
), and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
"At the correctness end of the spectrum, where deference in terms of legal questions is at its lowest, are those cases where the issues concern the interpretation of a provision limiting the tribunal's jurisdiction (jurisdictional error) or where there is a statutory right of appeal which allows the reviewing court to substitute its opinion for that of the tribunal and where the tribunal has no greater expertise than the court on the issue in question, as for example in the area of human rights. See for example
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ."
Mr. Justice Iacobucci, at pp. 591-592  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , also recognized that the presence of a privative clause is not determinative of the standard of review:
"Consequently, even where there is no privative clause and where there is a statutory right of appeal, the concept of the specialization of duties requires that deference be shown to decisions of specialized tribunals on matters which fall squarely within the tribunal's expertise. This point was reaffirmed in
United Brotherhood of Carpenters and Joiners of America, Local 579 v. Bradco Construction Ltd.
, [1993] 2 S.C.R. 316 (
Bradco
), where Sopinka, J., writing for the majority, stated the following at p. 335;
'... the expertise of the tribunal is of the utmost importance in determining the intention of the legislator with respect to the degree of deference to be shown to a tribunal's decision in the absence of a full privative clause. Even where the tribunal's enabling statute provides explicitly for appellate review, as was the case in
Bell Canada
, supra, it has been stressed that deference should be shown by the appellate tribunal to the opinions of the specialized lower tribunal on matters squarely within its jurisdiction.
'On the other side of the coin, a lack of relative expertise on the part of the tribunal vis-à-vis the particular issue before it as compared with the reviewing court is a ground for a refusal of deference.'"
[13]
As already mentioned, the applicant and the respondent disagreed where along the spectrum the case at bar fell. According to the applicant, the present case fell between the two extremes of patent unreasonableness and correctness. The court should accord the adjudicator a considerable measure of deference on the question of interpretation of the collective agreement but, following the repeal of the privative clause, not the highest degree represented by the patently unreasonable test. The repeal of the privative clause was indicative of Parliament's intent that review should be more amenable.
[14]
Conversely, the respondent submitted that Parliament, by removing the privative clause, intended a somewhat greater degree of review than that enunciated by Cory, J.,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  2
, supra, but that this case did not fall in the middle of the spectrum. A decision of a labour arbitrator should be accorded a substantial degree of judicial deference.
[15]
In support of his submission, the applicant pointed to four indicia that should be regarded by the court in determining the degree of deference which should be granted to a tribunal: the specialized nature of the tribunal; the existence of a statutory right of appeal; the nature of the issue to be decided and whether it is squarely with the expertise of the tribunal; and the existence of a privative clause. In the case at bar, it was not contested by the applicant that a labour arbitrator is a highly specialized decision-maker, meeting the first of the indicia for judicial deference. Second, there was no statutory right of appeal from the arbitrator's decision, supporting judicial deference. Third, the question to be addressed -- the interpretation of the collective agreement -- fell squarely into the area of expertise of the adjudicator. Only the fourth consideration -- the non-existence of a privative clause -- mitigated against judicial deference. However, as discussed in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, the non-existence of a privative clause is not alone determinative.
[16]
In the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  O.A.C. 1, at pp. 250-251, La Forest, J., summarized the degree of deference which should be accorded to an arbitrator's decision:
"This court has stated in previous cases that courts should, as a matter of policy, defer to the expertise of the arbitrator in questions relating to the interpretation of collective agreement: see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . This development is traced in the dissenting reasons of Wilson, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at pp. 1340-1342. It is clear that an arbitrator has jurisdiction 'stricto sensu' to interpret the provisions of a collective agreement in the course of determining the arbitrability of matters under that agreement. In that case the arbitrator is acting within his or her 'home territory', and any judicial review of that interpretation must only be to a standard of patent unreasonableness."
I note that in both cases cited by La Forest, J. --
International Union, United Automobile, Aerospace and Agricultural Implement Workers of America (U.A.W.), Local 720 v. Volvo Canada Ltd.
, [1980] 1 S.C.R. 178; 27 N.R. 502; 33 N.S.R.(2d) 22; 57 A.P.R. 22; 99 D.L.R.(3d) 193 and
McConnell, Hopkinson, Wilson and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra -- the arbitrators' decisions were not protected by a privative clause.
[17]
In my opinion, having considered the criteria referred to above and the cases from the Supreme Court dealing with the standard of review, I find that the decision of the arbitrator in the case at bar should be accorded considerable or significant curial deference, particularly since it concerns a matter squarely within the scope of the arbitrator's jurisdiction and special expertise. Although I was unable to come up with a pat phrase -- such as "patently reasonable" -- to describe the kind of decision that demands judicial intercession, it is sufficient to say that only decisions not supportable by the evidence are subject to intervention.
Is The Adjudicator's Decision
Supportable By The Evidence?
[18]
The substantive question for review is whether the arbitrator made a decision supported by the evidence in concluding that the employer should have enquired of other employees who would be affected, including the grievor, as to whether there was a reasonable conflict of interest that would justify not changing their schedule to accommodate the annual leave. In reaching his conclusion, the arbitrator interpreted that "interests" in the context of clause 16.05(d) should not be restricted to mean only the scheduled annual leave of other employees or their requests for annual leave. In so doing, the arbitrator found that article 22.07 of the collective agreement did not apply.
[19]
The applicant has submitted that article M-6 of the Master Agreement between Treasury Board and PSAC, which applies to the collective agreement, makes it clear that the employer's managerial responsibilities are only restricted to the extent provided in the agreement. Furthermore, the applicant also submits that no reasonable interpretation of article 16.05 could find an obligation on the part of the employer to consult with employees before scheduling shift changes. Article 16.05 simply deals with the obligation of the employer to grant an employee's request unless the employer has good reason not to do so. The respondent submitted that the article does not bear in any way upon an obligation of the employer to have any consultation in the scheduling of shifts. According to the respondent, the scheduling of shifts is one thing and the granting of leave is another; there is no relationship in the collective agreement between them.
[20]
Although I find that the applicant has made a persuasive case, its arguments cannot prevail. The arbitrator's decision, although I may not agree, is supported by the evidence. A fundamental object in construing the terms of a collective agreement is to discover the intention of the parties. A decision which reflects an appreciation for the dynamics of the workplace is precisely the kind of decision which merits a high degree of curial deference. The decision is reasonably supported by the evidence and, as such, there is no scope for judicial interference.
[21]
This application for judicial review is dismissed.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Kelli A. Simmonds/saf
Footnotes
1.	The privative clause in the
Public Service Staff Relations Act
was repealed by the
Public Service Reform Act
, S.C. 1992, c. 54, s. 73, effective June 1, 1993.
[End of document]