[1]
Rouleau, J.
: This is an appeal and a cross-appeal from a decision of the Associate Senior Prothonotary dated March 26, 1992.
[2]
By way of background, both parties are engaged in the business of marketing and making available for sale in Canada, electric shavers. Electric shavers can be classified as being either "foil" i.e., using linear cutting edges, or "rotary" i.e., using circular cutting edges. For the purpose of his action. I need only consider the subcategory of "rotary" electric shavers.
[3]
Since 1966, Philips Electronics N.V. (Philips), has marketed in Canada, a triple-headed rotary shaver consisting of three individual shaving heads in the configuration of an equilateral triangle. Philips is the registered owner of the following trademarks for use in association with this triple-headed shaver:
[see printed copy]
[4]
Remington Rand Corporation and Remington Products (Canada) Inc. (Remington) plan to market a new triple-headed rotary shaver in Canada. The three heads are arranged in the same configuration as the Philips' product. They anticipate that Philips will try to restrain them from marketing their product on the grounds of trademark infringement. Indeed, in 1985, Philips obtained an interlocutory injunction restraining Windermere Consumer Products from introducing a triple-headed Ronson shaver in the Canadian market:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  originating notice of motion dated June 24, 1991, Remington seeks to expunge Philips' trademarks from the register pursuant to s. 57 of the
Trade-marks Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. T-13, on the grounds that they are "functional" in nature and not therefore the proper subject matter of a trademark and, furthermore, that they were no longer distinctive.
[6]
In support of this, Remington filed the affidavit of Jeffery Kapec, an industrial designer, which gives evidence to the effect that any engineer or designer working in the shaver field, and asked to design a shaver with three rotary cutters, would produce a design corresponding to the Philips design, without prior knowledge of the Philips product. In his affidavit, Mr. Kapec goes on to state that having due regard to operating and engineering objectives, the equilateral triple-headed configuration is the best functional design, and that any other design would result in increased cost, greater number of parts, increased weight, less efficiency and poorer performance.
[7]
Philips denies that these trademarks are functional. They submit that, within the subcategory of rotary shavers, three heads are not inherently better than two or four heads. Furthermore, within the sub-subcategory of three headed rotary shavers, the equilateral triple-headed configuration is neither the only, nor the best configuration, it is merely one of the possible configurations. Mr. Porrey, in para. 15 of his affidavit, goes on to express the following opinion:
"In my opinion, no shaving system nor configuration is best for all areas of a man's face. This is particularly true when one realizes that not only the various areas of a face have different shapes, but the same areas may differ from person to person as well."
[8]
To rebut the allegation that the trademarks were no longer distinctive, Philips filed the affidavit of Mr. McGuinn, the Vice-President and General Manager of the Canadian subsidiary, which gives evidence, including statistics, regarding the sale and advertisement of Philips' triple-headed rotary shavers in Canada.
[9]
By notice of motion dated January 21, 1992, Remington requested an order pursuant to rule 704(7) of the
Federal Court Rules
granting them leave to cross-examine Mr. Porrey and Mr. McGuinn on their affidavits. The affidavit of Mr. Stratton filed in support of the request to cross-examine Mr. Porrey states at para. 14:
"Evidence regarding the orientation of the cutter heads in the Philips' triple-headed rotary shavers would appear to be important, material evidence in assessing the respondent's allegation that within the sub-subcategory of three headed rotary shavers, the equilateral triple-headed configuration is neither the only nor the best configuration, it is merely one of the possible configurations."
Mr. Stratton goes on to add:
"Cross-examination of Mr. McGuinn is required in order to determine the relative success with which double-headed rotary shavers have been marketed in Canada."
[10]
By order dated March 26, 1992, the Associate Senior Prothonotary ordered Mr. Porrey to be made available for cross-examination "limited to evidence regarding the orientation and configuration of the cutter heads in the Philips' triple-headed rotary shavers". By notice of motion dated April 6, 1992 the respondent, Philips, appeals this order.
[11]
The Associate Senior Prothonotary declined the applicants' request to cross-examine Mr. McGuinn. Remington is now cross-appealing this decision.
[12]
As a preliminary matter, s. 57 of the
Trade-marks Act
, confers exclusive original jurisdiction on the Federal Court to order that any entry in the register be amended or struck out. Section 58 of the
Act
provides that:
"An application under s. 57 shall be made either by the filing of an originating notice of motion, by counterclaim in an action for the infringement of the trademark, or by statement of claim in an action claiming additional relief under this Act."
[13]
In the present instance, Remington made an application under s. 57, not by counterclaim in an action for infringement, nor by statement of claim but rather by filing an originating notice of motion. Section 59(3) of the
Act
provides that when an application is made under s. 57 by the filing of an originating notice of motion, the proceeding of the application shall be heard and determined summarily on evidence adduced by affidavit unless the court otherwise directs. Cross-examination is not permitted as a matter of course, unless there is some ambiguity in the affidavits filed, or some reason to conclude that cross-examination would provide evidence required for the proper disposition of the expungement application; see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 208.
[14]
Rule 704(7) of the
Federal Court Act
provides:
"No person shall cross-examine any person on any affidavit filed under this rule without leave of the court."
A party seeking leave to cross-examine must show special circumstances for requiring cross-examination; see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 247. In determining whether to grant leave to cross-examine, the following principles apply: cross-examination should not be permitted in areas that are within the knowledge or capability of knowledge, of the examining party; cross-examination under this rule should not become an examination for discovery; cross-examination might be permitted in areas of ambiguity and finally, it might be permitted to establish bias of an expert affiant;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.).
[15]
Counsel for the respondent Philips, submits that the prothonotary erred in permitting cross-examination of Mr. Porrey's affidavit insofar as, when read as a whole, there is nothing ambiguous about his opinion or its basis. Furthermore, it was submitted that it was unclear what, if any, relevant evidence would be revealed by the cross-examination as ordered, nor what the scope of that cross-examination would be and that what Remington was actually seeking is discovery in the guise of cross-examination.
[16]
Counsel for the applicant, Remington, submits that the prothonotary erred in failing to permit cross-examination of Mr. McGuinn's affidavit insofar as Mr. McGuinn's affidavit contains no evidence regarding the sales and marketing of Philips' double-headed rotary shaver and that the relative success of the double-headed shaver is material in assessing Philips' allegation that within the subcategory of rotary shavers, three heads are not necessarily better than one, two or four.
[17]
The parties appeared before me, in Ottawa, on April 28, 1992. At the outset, I am of the view that I am not bound by a decision of a prothonotary which involves the exercise of discretion. While I may give great weight to the views expressed by the prothonotary, in the final analysis, I believe both parties are entitled to the discretion of a judge and not a subordinate officer. This view has been endorsed by the Court of Appeal in
The Ship " <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 127, and more recently in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.).
[18]
Having said as much, I am not convinced that the prothonotary erred. With regards to Mr. Porrey's affidavit, I am of the view that, at the trial of this matter, the possible orientations and configurations of the three cutting heads is relevant and material to Philips' allegation that the equilateral configuration which is the subject matter of these trademarks, is not the "best" arrangement. For example, can it be said that an arrangement such as that reproduced in Figure 1 below is as good as, or as effective as the configuration reproduced in Figure 2?
[see printed copy]
[19]
Furthermore, I am satisfied that the order dated March 26, 1992, does limit the scope of the permissible areas of cross-examination to "evidence regarding the orientation and configuration of the cutter heads  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  triple-headed rotary shavers". The scope of permissible questions is sufficiently narrow in my view, so as to preclude the applicant from embarking on a full fledged discovery of Mr. Porrey.
[20]
I also agree with the prothonotary that leave should not be granted to allow the applicants to cross-examine Mr. McGuinn. I agree with counsel for the respondents that if I were to allow the applicants request, I would be opening up these proceedings in a manner not contemplated by the
Act
or the
Rules
. It is to be remembered that the applicants did not proceed by way of a statement of claim but rather by notice of motion, and the matter is to be dealt with summarily. There could be a number of reasons why the double-headed rotary shaver does not sell as well as the triple-headed model, for instance colour, price or shape. Furthermore, I believe that this information can be ascertained by the applicant without cross-examining the affiant.
[21]
Accordingly, for the reasons just given, both these motions are dismissed. As neither party was successful in their appeal, there will be no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed;
cross-appeal dismissed.
Editor: Gary W. McLaughlin/blk
[End of document]