[1]
Muldoon, J.
: The applicant seeks leave pursuant to section 82.1(1) of the Immigration Act to move for writs, or orders in the nature of writs, of certiorari and mandamus in regard to respondents having invoked paragraph section 19(1)(b) of the Act and their not having invoked section 14(1) of the Act in his favour.
[2]
The impugned decision to deny the applicant permanent residence in Canada, based on s. 19(1)(b) runs as follows:
"... in that you are unable to support yourself and your dependents, as you have been in receipt of social assistance since Aug. 11, 1986. Although you have a Canadian citizen son and a permanent resident son in Canada [neither of whom is one of the above-mentioned dependents] they are not in a financial position to be able to sponsor you and your dependents."
[3]
That decision is dated November 6, 1989.
[4]
The application herein was filed in this court on January 22, 1990, and the affidavits in support were filed on February 7, 1990. The applicant's solicitors identified in the field documents are the University of British Columbia Legal Clinic c/o Faculty of Law, B.C. 1822 East Mall, Vancouver. The application having been brought more than two months late, the affidavit of a third year law student (and not the involved Queen's counsel who is the staff lawyer there) was composed to explain away the tardiness. He swears that the "U.B.C. Legal Clinic did not receive the applicant's file from" (someone or somebody called) "Legal Services until November 30, 1989, seven days after the limitation had expired". He further explains that due "to the onset of the exam period and due to my obligations as a law student and articled student at the U.B.C. Legal Clinic I was unable to properly attend [sic] to this file before the Legal Clinic closed for the holiday season on December 15, 1989". And so on, until on January 12, 1990, with the complicity of the Queen's counsel who serves as a staff lawyer did the deponent obtain the competent advice of a professor (and practitioner) of immigration law at the University of British Columbia.
[5]
Everyone agrees that student legal aid clinics can be almost as helpful to law students as clinical clerkship is to medical students. If anything is to be learned in those clinics, equally for both professions, it is not only a scrupulous attention to detail but also, and equally if not more important,
a sense of urgency
. If clients' legal business and litigation cannot be undertaken in a competent and timely manner they ought to be declined or passed to those professions who can do so. The holiday season is a pathetic excuse. Whatever liability might have been precipitated upon the university's and the staff lawyer's heads for the manifest dilatoriness in the matter seems mercifully to be obviated by the respondents' quite correct, but still generous submission:
"5. In these [earlier therein recited] circumstances it appears that the applicant promptly decided to challenge the denial of landing and the late filing is attributable to omissions and/or delay by his counsel. Without prejudice to the respondents' position on the merits of the application for leave the respondents do not oppose an extension of time to file the leave application."
It is to be hoped that student legal aid clinics are not gulling students into the notion that they can forget about their clients' interests, which are their all important raison d'etre, just because the clinic closes for holidays. The realities of life, nevertheless, march on inexorably.
[6]
The respondents' brief in this matter is first rate and merits repetition here in part.
"Grounds 1 and 2 of the leave application, Charter
Section 15 vis-a-vis Immigration Act section 19(1)(b)
"1. It is submitted that section 19(1)(b) (reproduced on page 2 of the applicant's submissions) does not infringe the equality and no discrimination provisions of section 15 of the Charter. It is submitted this is apparent from the face of the statute. It becomes even clearer if one has regard to the analysis of section 15 and tests formulated by the Supreme Court of Canada in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
. . . . .
per Wilson, J.,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at pp. 1331-1332
'In determining whether there is discrimination on grounds relating to the person characteristics of the individual or group, it is important to look not only at the impugned legislation which has created a distinction that violates the right to equality but also to the larger social, political and legal context. McIntyre, J., emphasized  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (at p. 167):
"For, as has been said, a bad law will not be saved merely because it operates equally upon those to whom it has application. Nor will a law necessarily be had because it makes distinctions."'
. . . . .
"2. It is further submitted it is trite law that Canada, as a sovereign nation, is entitled to set criteria and conditions for entry to or being landed in Canada. This is what s. 19(1)(b) does.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.), at p. 176
"3. It is submitted the applicant's submissions are premised on the erroneous assumptions that s. 19(1)(b) differentiates based on age or alternatively, employment and that old, poor people can never satisfy section 19(1)(b).
"4. Age is not a factor in section 19(1)(b) and it is submitted it is a fallacy to suggest older people are incapable or unable to work or support themselves.
"5. Old as well as young people may be able to meet the requirements of section 19(1)(b) but it is not a function of age.
"6. Turning to the case at bar, while the applicant's counsel alleges the applicant is not employable that remains an unproven fact. The applicant does not swear he is unemployable. In fact he says he is willing to work; Orantes' affidavit paragraph 6. The evidence suggests the applicant is healthy and robust. At the interview of November 6, 1989, the applicant told Immigration he has a diary in which he records all of his earnings; affidavit of Judith Liu, Exhibit 'E'.
. . . . .
"9. In the case at bar, Immigration suggested that the applicant's 30 year old wife - who is apparently healthy and employable - should seek a job; affidavit of Judith Liu, Exhibit 'E'. Further, consideration was given to whether the applicant's two sons in Canada could support him but they were found to have insufficient financial resources; affidavit of Judith Liu, Exhibit 'E'. All of this shows there are ample possibilities and safeguards within section 19(1)(b) and it does not infringe section 15 of the Charter.
"10. Further on section 19(1)(b) of the Immigration Act vis-à-vis section 15 of the Charter, it is submitted that the thrust of the applicant's submissions is that anyone who seeks to be landed in Canada but cannot meet the requirements of the Immigration Act and Regulations is discriminated against and so section 15 has been infringed. The respondents submit that would be an absurd result and one not intended nor provided for under section 15 of the Charter.
. . . . .
"Grounds 3 and 4 of the leave application, Charter s. 7 vis-à-vis Immigration Act, s. 19(1)(b).
"1. It is submitted that section 7 of the Charter does not include a right to be landed in Canada which is what the applicant argues for. 'Liberty' as used in section 7 of the Charter has to do with bodily freedom from punishment or suffering and the physical and psychological integrity of the person
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
"2. With respect to personal safety and integrity the applicant and his dependants have safeguards available to him through the convention refugee process under which the applicant is being considered. That process is ongoing.
"3. It is submitted that the points raised in the applicant's paragraphs 2, 3, 4 under grounds III, IV do not amount to a section 7 violation.
. . . . .
"Ground 5 of the leave application, Immigration Act s. 114(2)
"1. It is submitted that it is premature to consider section 114(2) of the Immigration Act as the applicant's claim for convention refugee status remains outstanding. The process is under way for determination of such claim.
"2. In any event the applicant has not made a specific request for consideration under section 114(2).
"3. Further and in any event, humanitarian and compassionate considerations were looked at in making the November 6, 1989.
Affidavit of Judith Liu Exhibit 'G'"
[7]
Now it is understood, since Associate Chief Justice Jerome's decision of March 8, 1990, in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ]. The guidelines appear to limit their application to particular classes of persons, namely "members of official delegations, athletic teams or cultural groups", and persons in "family dependency situations" described in the guidelines, as Jerome, A.C.J., noted in the Yhap case.
[8]
In that recent decision, the Associate Chief Justice of this court invoked s. 114(2) of the Act. Seen in its context, it appears as follows:
"114(1) The Governor-in-Council may make regulations
(a) [through, and including]
. . . . .
(jj) ...
"114(2) The Governor-in-Council may by regulation
exempt
any person
from any regulation
made under subsection (1) or otherwise facilitate the admission of any person where the Governor-in-Council is satisfied that the person should be
exempted from that regulation
or the person's admission
should be facilitated
for reasons of public policy or due to the existence of compassionate or humanitarian considerations" (emphasis not in original text)
Section 114(2) provides that the cabinet may
by regulation
exempt any person from any regulation made by the cabinet under section 114(1). Neither section confers on that body the authority to repeal, to suspend, to override or to exempt anyone from, any provision of the Act itself, just the regulations under section 114(1). Unless Parliament delegates to the Governor-in-Council the authority to exempt anyone from the provisions of a constitutionally enacted Act of Parliament, of course, the Governor-in-Council has no authority to do it by whatever may be its device: a regulation or an order-in-council. That was constitutionally settled centuries ago when Parliament (in England) won its conflict with the king and the kings gave up the notion of their divine right to rule.
[9]
So, no matter how one tries to invoke it, section 114(2) gives unto no one - not the cabinet, not the Minister, not any functionary - any power to exempt the applicant from the strictures of s. 19(1)(b), a valid provision of an Act of Parliament. Whatever comfort may be afforded to the applicant by the Yhap case is not denied to him here and so, it appears, that his application in that regard is at least premature, if valid at all.
[10]
The applicant's submissions evince some misplaced notions of fairness, which observation is not to denigrate the idealism which apparently and rightly fuels them, and which fundamentally sustains the nation's political and juridical institutions. This nation is a parliamentary democracy, which means that the elected tribunes of the people are those who must lawfully enact the legislation. It means that Parliament, by legislation under the rule of law, may choose which foreigners, if any, may be legally admitted for permanent residence in Canada. It means that if parliamentary democracy is to survive in Canada, Parliament must make those choices and not become helpless in the face of asserted entries by aliens, no matter how sympathetic their cases, like the applicant's case. It takes a certain degree of intellectual toughness to support the principles of parliamentary democracy in face of various individuals who seek migration into Canada against the will of the democratically elected representatives of the people (not to disparage the Senate of Canada). If the Charter be interpreted in such a manner as to obviate the will of Parliament in a matter such as this, it is the sort of frustration which would ultimately destroy national government by amputating the lawful means of governance. In any event, the Charter cannot be so invoked in this case. Whether it is even appropriate to require genuine refugees to be able to support themselves in this applicant's circumstances, is a question of policy which cannot be resolved by a court since the requirement does not violate the Constitution. It does, however, generate sympathy for this applicant.
[11]
In the applicant's submissions, Part IV, is an interesting, but wrong, assertion which is notable:
"3. ... The applicant submits that he is being forced by an action of an official of the government to attend a hearing at which he will be required to give evidence of such a personal and private nature that to so force him would be to subject him to, at the expense of his personal privacy and integrity, a severe psychological detriment. A hearing at the CRDD would require the applicant to relate for a fourth time, to a government official, a series of events of a nature which is psychologically painful for him to remember. Further it is submitted that to again make the applicant relate such events is an affront to his dignity.
This is a
prima facie
breach of his right to security of the person under s. 7
." (author's emphasis).
In effect, this submission says that the applicant has grown tired of the enquiry process, which is in effect. Now, that is entirely inappropriate. After all, it is the applicant who is asking Canada to do him the favour of allowing him to take up residence here. He is not being harassed nor is he in any physical peril at the hands of this democratic state, nor of anyone else insofar as the evidence indicates. The government and its officials were not the companions of his life. Only he here knows all about it and, since he seeks the favour, he must surely realize that he must answer the questions; and at least a few times more than once if reasonably required to do so. After all it is the applicant who seeks and may yet gain compassionate and humanitarian considerations based on the experiences of his life.
[12]
Leave is accordingly not granted.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/hlh
[End of document]