Introduction
[1]
Strayer, J.
: These three appeals, which were argued together, are from decisions of David J. Martin, a member of the Trade Marks Opposition Board (hereinafter referred to as "the Board") in which he rejected the opposition of the appellants to the registration of trademarks of the respondent. The opposition to the registration of SUPER MAC'S was rejected on July 31, 1986. The opposition to the registration of MAC'S SNACKS & Design was rejected on March 31, 1987. The opposition to the registration of MAC'S PLUS was rejected on April 30, 1987.
[2]
The grounds for opposition were essentially that the marks in question are confusing with trademarks of the appellants and that they are not sufficiently distinctive to distinguish the respondent's wares or services.
[3]
While it was agreed that in principle different dates (date of filing the application for a proposed trademark or date of first use for a trademark based on use where the issue is entitlement, and date of filing the statement of opposition where the issue is registrability or distinctiveness) would be relevant to the different grounds of opposition, in reality there was no essential difference in the facts as of the various possible relevant dates involved in these three appeals. I will, therefore, ignore such differences in dates for these purposes.
[4]
I will discuss briefly the role of the court in such appeals and then deal separately with each decision of the Board and the trademark to which it relates.
Role of the Court on Appeals in Opposition Proceedings
[5]
It seems clear that in opposition proceedings where the issue is essentially one of fact concerning confusion or distinctiveness the decision of the Registrar or the Board represents a finding of fact and not the exercise of discretion. Therefore the court should not impose upon itself the same degree of restraint, in reviewing that decision, as it would if the decision were essentially an exercise of discretion. It is thus free to review the facts to determine whether the decision of the Registrar or Board was correct, but that decision should not be set aside lightly considering the expertise of those who regularly make such determinations. ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at pp. 199-200) While different panels of the Federal Court of Appeal have variously expressed the duty of this court on appeal to be determine whether the Registrar has "clearly erred", ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 272) or whether he has simply "gone wrong", ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 71) it appears that it is the duty of a judge sitting on an appeal such as this to come to his own conclusion as to the correctness of the finding of the Registrar. In doing that he must, however, take into account the special experience and knowledge of the Registrar or the Board, and more importantly have regard to whether new evidence has been put before him that was not before the Board. The parties are agreed in the present case that there was no evidence before me which was not before the Opposition Board when it made each of the decisions now under appeal.
Super Mac's
[6]
The predecessor to the applicant filed an application on October 6, 1980, to register this trademark in association with "retail grocery and convenience store services" based on proposed use in Canada. The evidence has since shown the intention of the applicant to be to use this trademark to identify a larger version of its usual convenience stores, such stores to be somewhat similar to a supermarket.
[7]
On November 10, 1981, the opponents, appellants in the present proceeding, filed a statement of opposition including three grounds. They contended that (1) the trademark applied for was not registrable by virtue of s. 12(1)(d) of the Trade Marks Act because it is confusing with some fifteen trademarks of the opponents, including the trademark BIG MAC; (2) the applicant is not entitled to registration by virtue of s. 16(3)(a) of the Trade Marks Act because it would be confusing with all of these same registered trademarks previously used in Canada by the opponents; and (3) the proposed trademark would not be distinctive because it does not distinguish nor is it adapted to distinguish the applicant's services from the wares and services of the opponents sold and carried out in connection with those trademarks already referred to in the first ground.
[8]
Mr. David J. Martin, the presiding member of the Board, considered the first two grounds together as they both involved the issue of confusion, and he had regard to the circumstances set out in s. 6(5) of the act for the determination of confusion. In doing so he focused particularly on the opponents' trademark BIG MAC as he considered it the most relevant of any of their trademarks invoked by the opponents. He found there to be no likelihood of confusion.
[9]
With respect to the third ground Mr. Martin concluded that the trademark SUPER MAC'S is adapted to distinguish the applicant's services from the wares and services of the opponents associated with trademarks such as McDONALD'S and BIG MAC. He appears to have reached this conclusion on the basis that as there was no reasonable likelihood of confusion between the marks of the opponents and the proposed mark of the applicant, the latter was sufficiently distinctive.
[10]
I am in agreement with Mr. Martin's conclusions on the issue of confusion and can see no advantage in reciting the evidence here. I believe there was ample evidence to justify his analysis that with respect to the factors set out in s. 6(5)(c) and (d) of the Act this trademark could not be said to be confusing. While counsel for the opponents argued that much of the evidence concerning the nature of the applicant's business in the past was irrelevant with respect to the possibility of confusion of a proposed trademark, I believe that that evidence was in the main relevant with respect to these two factors involving the nature of the wares, services, or business and of the trade in which the two parties are engaged. The evidence showed that the trademark SUPER MAC was to be used for an enlarged version of the typical MAC'S convenience store and therefore, the nature of the trade in which these two parties have been engaged is quite relevant. Counsel for the opponents also criticized the fact that Mr. Martin had taken into account a response filed by McDonald's Corporation on July 21, 1971, in the course of McDonald's having sought to obtain registration of the trademark BIG MAC. This response was to an opposition by the predecessors of the present applicant who objected to the registration of BIG MAC on the grounds that it would be confusing with the already registered trademarks MAC'S MILK and MAC'S. McDonald's contended at that time that the products the parties sold were essentially different and
"are not sold in competition with each other and it is believed that we have the situation here where the cumulative difference between the trademarks and the specific products to which the marks are applied is clearly sufficient to preclude confusion."
Opponents now contend that such statements made in 1971 are irrelevant because the nature of the applicant's business has changed in the meantime as some of their outlets have come to sell food ready for consumption that may be taken out by customers. It appears to me that Mr. Martin has taken into account the fact that some changes in the business of the applicant have occurred since 1971. He has given the statement made by McDonald's Corporation in 1971 some weight but not undue weight. I believe he could have reached the conclusion he did without any reference to the 1971 statement and I do not think he was wrong to refer to it.
[11]
With respect to the third ground of opposition, namely lack of distinctiveness, while I find the decision of the Board somewhat hard to follow I also find that the proposed trademark SUPER MAC'S is adapted so as to distinguish the services of the applicant from those of the opponents. The opponents principally rely here, as I understand it, on the proposition that they and their associated companies have over the years pursued a program of introducing food products and advertising their wares and services in association with words and coined words using the prefixes "Mc" and "Mac". There are some precedents supporting the proposition that such a practice has identified the combination of these prefixes with the names of edibles as referring uniquely to products or services offered by the opponents. (See e.g.,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (U.S.D.C.)) But even if such linguistic confections can in a proper case be found to be distinctive of the opponents, I do not think that their claim to monopoly can be extended to the use of these syllables when used as separate words either alone or in combination with other words. I agree also with the Board that many of the factors which indicate the lack of probable confusion between the applicant's proposed trademark and the opponents' trademarks also support the view that the proposed trademark SUPER MAC'S, if used as intended, is adapted so as to distinguish the relevant services of the applicant from those of the opponents.
[12]
I would, therefore, dismiss the appeal in T-2166-86 in respect of the trademark SUPER MAC'S.
Mac's Snacks
[13]
The predecessors of the respondents applied on February 12, 1979 for the registration of a trademark and design as follows:
[Trademark symbol omitted. See original source.]
The application as ultimately amended was based on use in Canada since August 1978 in association with
"restaurant services, namely, ready to eat food take-out services in a convenience store"
and on proposed use in association with a list of wares consisting of different kinds of food including hamburgers, cheeseburgers, fishburgers, pies, tarts, milkshakes, coffee, etc.
[14]
The opponents filed on September 15, 1982, a statement of opposition based on the following grounds: (1) the trademark is not registrable because it is confusing with six registered trademarks of the opponents including McDONALD'S; (2) the applicant is not entitled to registration in association with these restaurant services as the trademark is confusing with the six previously mentioned registered trademarks already used in Canada by the opponents; (3) the trademark applied for is not distinctive having regard to the previously mentioned trademarks of the opponents; and (4) (as later amended) that the applicant had not in fact used the trademark in association with restaurant services since August 1978 as alleged in the application for registration. It will be noted that objections (2), (3) and (4) relate to the use of MAC'S SNACKS in association with services.
[15]
Mr. David J. Martin, presiding member of the Board, rejected the opposition. With respect to ground (1) he considered that the opponents' trademark McDONALD'S was the most relevant of those cited by the opponents for purposes of determining the probability of confusion. In his analysis he considered each of the factors set out in subs. 6(5) of the Trade Marks Act. While he found, in effect, that the circumstances referred to in ss. 6(5)(a)-(d) tended to support the possibility of confusion, he found that the test in s. 6(5)(e), namely the "degree of resemblance" between the trademarks, strongly favoured the applicant. Using the test of first impression, he was of the view that the average consumer would not assume that MAC'S was simply a contraction of McDONALD'S, particularly when combined with the word SNACKS. I respectfully agree with the conclusion of Mr. Martin on this point and am satisfied that it justifies his rejection of the first ground of opposition.
[16]
Had it been put in issue on appeal, I would have been inclined to disagree with the Board's conclusion that the factors referred to in ss. 6(5)(c) and (d) tend to favour the opponents. Putting aside all the semantic exercises, I would have been satisfied by the evidence that the nature of the wares and services of the two parties, and the nature of the respective trades in which they are engaged or intend to engage, are sufficiently different so as to militate strongly against confusion. It is true that in some probably small measure the two parties compete for the same market but the evidence is clear that they do it or will do it from quite different premises and with readily distinguishable products and services.
[17]
Mr. Martin rejected grounds of opposition (2) and (3) on the basis that his conclusions as to the absence of probable confusion in respect of ground (1) would apply equally as a basis for rejecting grounds (2) and (3). I respectfully agree.
[18]
With respect to ground (4) the contention of the opponents before the Board and in this appeal was that the applicant had admitted that it had not used the trademark applied for in association with restaurant services since August 1978. This contention was based mainly on the cross-examination of the applicant's representative where he denied that the applicant had been engaged in the operation of any "restaurant" during the period in question. In rejecting the opponents' contention Mr. Martin distinguished between the provision of "restaurant services" and the operation of a "restaurant", in effect holding that while the latter included the former, the former did not necessarily include the latter. The evidence on behalf of the applicant was that Mac's Milk outlets do sell some foods which are ready to eat and some of the outlets have delicatessen services where one may order sandwiches made to his specifications. Also some have microwave facilities for heating prepared food bought on the premises. However, the evidence is also quite clear that Mac's Milk neither provides an eating area in its stores for consumption on the premises nor does it encourage any such consumption. I do not accept that such a facility would be commonly understood to be a "restaurant" and I therefore agree with the distinction which was made by the Board as between the operation of a restaurant (which the applicant admitted it had not engaged in) and the provision of "restaurant services" (which it demonstrated it had performed). I therefore agree with the conclusion of the Board in rejecting ground (4) as well.
[19]
I am, therefore, dismissing the appeal in T-1072-87 in respect of the decision of the Board of March 31, 1987, rejecting the appellants' opposition to the registration of the trademark MAC'S SNACKS & Design.
Mac's Plus
[20]
A predecessor of the respondents applied on June 9, 1982, to register the trademark MAC'S PLUS based on use in Canada since 1978 in association with the following services:
"the operation of a retail grocery and convenience store, including a delicatessen, bakery, fast-food takeout counter and ice cream bar."
The opponents, appellants in this matter, filed a statement of opposition on July 13, 1983, alleging the following grounds: (1) the trademark applied for is not registrable because it is confusing with eleven specified trademarks belonging to the opponents including the trademark McDONALD'S; (2) the applicant was not the person entitled to registration of this trademark because it would be confusing with the eleven registered trademarks mentioned above which had been previously used in Canada by the opponents; and (3) the trademark sought to be registered is not distinctive of the services referred to in the application because of the aforementioned previously used trademarks of the opponents.
[21]
On behalf of the Board, the presiding member David J. Martin rejected the opponents' opposition. In determining ground (1) he considered the circumstances referred to in s. 6(5) of the Trade Marks Act. While he found that the facts in this case as related to the factors set out in s. 6(5)(a)-(d) generally favoured the position of the opponents, supporting the possibility of confusion, he found in considering the circumstances referred to in s. 6(5)(e) that there was little if any similarity between the marks of the parties. In doing so he had particular reference to the trademark McDONALD'S of the opponents, as he considered that there was little evidence before him concerning the use of the other ten trademarks invoked in the statement of opposition. He thus found there to be no reasonable probability of confusion between the trademark whose registration was applied for and the most relevant of the opponents' trademarks.
[22]
On a similar basis he rejected grounds (2) and (3) of the opposition, following the same reasoning as he did in his decision concerning the trademark MAC'S SNACKS as described above.
[23]
For the reasons which I set out in relation to MAC'S SNACKS, I confirm the conclusions of the Board on these matters. As in respect of that trademark, had the matter been properly before me I would have been inclined to go even farther than the Board and would have found a dissimilarity in the nature of the wares, services, business, and trade of the two parties.
[24]
On the appeal counsel for the opponents contended that the Board had reached its conclusion without having before it a preponderance of evidence showing an absence of probability of confusion. As I understand the decision of the Board, it was based mostly on a first impression of the two relevant marks leading it to conclude that there was little or no similarity between the two. This is a conclusion in which I concur and I see no need for other further evidence although I would have, as indicated before, taken into account some of the evidence submitted by the applicant with respect to the dissimilarity of the services and trade of the two parties. For example the evidence showed that in the Mac's stores designated as MAC'S PLUS there are delicatessens where customers may select various ready-to-eat foods which can be used in making a lunch and/or can order sandwiches assembled with such ingredients as they may specify. It is difficult to believe that any reasonable consumer would confuse these services and wares with those which the evidence shows are offered by McDonald's.
[25]
Counsel for the opponents also suggested that the Board erred in not taking into account the argument that the opponents had established a family of names based on the use of the syllable "Mc" or "Mac". As counsel for the applicant pointed out, this contention does not appear to have been pleaded specifically in the stated grounds of opposition. Whether or not the pleading was adequate, I am satisfied that this is not a compelling ground of opposition. For the reasons which I stated in connection with the SUPER MAC trademark I do not believe the creation of a "family" of names, by a process of bastardization involving the joining in one word of the Gaelic "Mac" or "Mc" with species of the fast-food genus or with other nouns, verbs and adjectives, can have the effect of precluding the use of those prefixes as separate words either standing alone or in combination with other words.
[26]
I am, therefore, dismissing the appeal in T-1221-87 from the decision of the Board rendered April 30, 1987.
Appeals dismissed.
Editor: Janette Blue/blk
[End of document]