[1]
Collier, J.
: This is a motion brought by the defendant under s. 419 of the Federal Court Rules, C.R.C., c. 663, for an order striking out the plaintiff's statement of claim on the grounds it discloses no reasonable cause of action and is an abuse of the process of the Court. After hearing this matter, on December 7, 1987, I dismissed the application. The following are my reasons for doing so.
[2]
The facts are taken from the statement of claim. For the purposes of this motion, they are deemed to be true.
[3]
The plaintiff is a Major in the Canadian Armed Forces and is currently posted at the Canadian Forces Base in Esquimalt, British Columbia. He joined the Royal Canadian Naval Reserve in 1958 and commenced training as a pilot in the Canadian Forces in 1967. The plaintiff's date of birth is July 7, 1939.
[4]
According to Article 15.17 of the Queen's Regulations and Orders for the Canadian Forces, passed pursuant to the provisions of the National Defence Act, R.S.C. 1970, c. N-4, as amended, the mandatory retirement age for the plaintiff is 47 years of age.
[5]
On January 6, 1984, the plaintiff took the position that the Queen's Regulations and Orders, insofar as they related to a mandatory retirement age of 47, were contrary to the Canadian Human Rights Act, S.C. 1976-77, c. 33, and the Canadian Bill of Rights, R.S.C. 1970, Appendix III. On January 30, 1984, the plaintiff received a memorandum wherein he was advised that he would be required to retire upon achieving age 47.
[6]
In August 1986, the plaintiff was informed that his service would be extended for twelve months, but that during the tenure of the extension of his employment, he could be terminated upon thirty days notice and would not be eligible for merit, board consideration or promotion.
[7]
In his statement of claim, the plaintiff seeks a declaration that art. 15.17 of the Queen's Regulations and Orders for the Canadian Forces is contrary to s. 15 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms, 1982, and therefore of no force and effect; a declaration that a proper interpretation of the Queen's Regulations and Orders does not require the plaintiff to retire at age 47; and general, punitive and special damages.
[8]
For clarity, I set out here, s. 15(1) of the Charter:
"15(1) Every individual is equal before and under the law and has the right to the equal protection and equal benefit of the law without discrimination and, in particular, without discrimination based on race, national or ethnic origin, colour, religion, sex, age or mental or physical disability."
[9]
In this motion, the defendant argues that the plaintiff's statement of claim should be struck on the following grounds: this Court has no jurisdiction to hear the proceeding; it does not disclose a reasonable cause of action; it is an abuse of the process of this Court because the National Defence Act prescribes the specific remedy to be pursued by the plaintiff; this Court ought to refuse the relief sought on the principle that the courts will not interfere in the relations between the Crown and the military and in light of the alternate remedy provided by the legislation; and, that s. 15(1) of the Charter, upon which the plaintiff relies, has no application to the voluntary and unilateral assumption of the rights and obligations of the plaintiff pursuant to the Queen's Orders and Regulations.
[10]
It is the defendant's position that s. 29 of the National Defence Act confers on the plaintiff a right of redress.
"29. Except in respect of a matter that would properly be the subject of an appeal or petition under Part IX or an application or appeal under Part IX.1, an officer or noncommissioned member who considers that he has suffered any personal oppression, injustice or other ill-treatment or that he has any other cause for grievance may as a matter of right seek redress from such superior authorities in such manner and under such conditions as shall be prescribed in regulations made by the Governor in Council."
[11]
The plaintiff is entitled to seek redress according to the grievance procedure as set out in the Queen's Regulations and Orders 19.26 and 19.27. These Regulations establish the procedures to be followed in submitting an application for redress of grievance. The statute and the Regulations provide every officer with a right to seek redress in respect of any matter of which he considers himself to be aggrieved. An officer exercising this right is entitled to have his complaint assessed and adjudicated upon by the authority who may grant the redress sought.
[12]
The defendant maintains that, where a statute prescribes a specific remedy, that remedy is the one that must be pursued. In making this argument, the defendant relies upon the decision of this Court in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  the statement of claim of the plaintiff, a civil servant, who was alleging wrongful suspensions, demotions, abuse of power and torts committed by his employer. His Lordship stated at p. 3:
"The jurisprudence has clearly established that, at common law, public servants held their appointments at the pleasure of the Crown and that their present rights of redress are conferred by statute. When a statute prescribes a specific remedy, that remedy is the one that must be pursued. The statutes governing the plaintiff's employment are the Public Service Employment Act, the Public Service Staff Relations Act, and the Financial Administration Act. The plaintiff was entitled to grieve with reference to his alleged grievances against the Regional Deputy Commissioner under his collective agreement. He did not do so."
[13]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.), this Court struck out a statement of claim brought by a member of the public service who was alleging wrongful termination for incompetence. After referring to the applicable appeal procedure found in the Public Service Employment Act, R.C.S. 1970, c. P-32, Dubé, J., stated at p. 758:
"When a statute prescribes a specific remedy, the general rule is that no remedy can be taken but that particular remedy prescribed by the statute. As stated by Lord Esher, M.R., in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 707). 'The ordinary rule of construction therefore applies to this case, that where the legislature has passed a new statute giving a new remedy, that remedy is the only one that can be pursued.'
"The Public Service Employment Act does provide a remedy for aggrieved public servants, namely the right to appeal. If no appeal is made against a recommendation of the deputy head, s. 31(4) provides that the Commission may take such action as it sees fit, including the release of the employee under s. 31(5)."
[14]
The defendant maintains that, in any event, this Court ought to refuse the relief sought by the plaintiff because an adequate alternative remedy for grievance and redress is provided for. In deciding whether an adequate alternative remedy exists, the courts are required to consider a number of relevant factors. That principle is made clear, the defendant submits, by the majority decision of the Supreme Court of Canada in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . In that case, the appellant alleged the denial of natural justice by an inferior committee, created pursuant to the governing statute, and the availability of a new hearing on appeal before a superior committee of the University senate. Rather than pursuing his grievance to a hearing before the superior committee, the appellant sought and obtained relief by way of mandamus and certiorari in the Court of Queen's Bench for Saskatchewan. The decision granting those remedies was reversed by the Court of Appeal. In upholding the decision of the Court of Appeal, the Supreme Court of Canada set out the factors to be considered in deciding whether an adequate and convenient remedy is available. Beetz, J., stated at p. 588 S.C.R.:
"In order to evaluate whether appellant's right of appeal to the senate committee constituted an adequate alternative remedy and even a better remedy than a recourse to the courts by way of prerogative writs, several factors should have been taken into consideration among which the procedure on the appeal, the composition of the senate committee, its powers and the manner in which they were probably to be exercised by a body which was not a professional court of appeal and was not bound to act exactly as one nor likely to do so. Other relevant factors include the burden of a previous finding, expeditiousness and costs."
[15]
The grievance and redress procedures legislated by s. 29 of the National Defence Act and art. 19.26 of the Queen's Orders and Regulations provide for the following:
1. an opportunity for an officer to make an oral complaint to the commanding officer, and, if not satisfied, an opportunity to present his complaint in writing to higher authorities;
2. an obligation on every person to whom a complaint is made, to cause such complaint to be inquired into;
3. the ability to require the complaint to be submitted to the Governor-in-Council;
4. the authority and obligation to afford full redress to the complainant, if satisfied of the justice of the complaint;
5. each leval of the grievance is independent of the others and unfettered by any previous finding at a lower level.
[16]
Having regard to the factors set out by Beetz, J., in the Harelkin case, the defendant submits that the above provisions clearly afford the plaintiff, an adequate alternative remedy, sufficient to deny the present relief sought by the plaintiff in his statement of claim.
[17]
Further, the defendant relies on the principle at common law, of courts not interfering in relations between the Crown and the military. The defendant relies on the decision in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.), wherein Marceau, J., stated at pp. 696-697:
"Both English and Canadian Courts have always considered, and have repeated whenever the occasion arose, that the Crown is in no way contractually bound to the members of the Armed Forces, that a person who joins the Forces enters into a unilateral commitment in return for which the Queen assumes no obligations, and that relations between the Queen and her military personnel, as such, in no way give rise to a remedy in the civil Courts. This principle of common law Courts not interfering in relations between the Crown and the military, the existence of which was clearly and definitively confirmed in England in the oft-cited case of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , was taken over by our Courts and repeated in a wide variety of situations ..."
[18]
After concluding that the provisions of the National Defence Act had not altered this principle, His Lordship, in granting a motion to strike out pursuant to rule 419, said at p. 698:
"In short, because the hiring of the plaintiff in the Armed Forces does not create any contractual obligation whatever on the part of the Crown; because the release of plaintiff, had it been unjustified, could not in any case be seen as having encroached upon his rights and, because only the appeal authorities to which plaintiff has already had recourse can grant a remedy with respect to his grievances concerning the way in which his commanding officer's decision was made, this Court had no jurisdiction to hear the action as instituted, based as it is on facts which could not give rise to the remedies claimed."
[19]
The defendant maintains that this judicial policy of restraint from interfering in relations between the Crown and the military, coupled with the legislative intent to resolve grievances and provide redress by internal means, should lead this Court to refuse the relief sought by the plaintiff in his statement of claim.
[20]
Finally, the defendant argues that s. 15 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms cannot be invoked in the circumstances of this case. This argument is based on the voluntary and unilateral nature of the relationship, whereby a member of the Armed Forces assumes the rights and obligations of military service. The enrollment of an individual as a member of the Armed Forces, does not create any contractual or other obligations on the Crown. The relationship is very different from the contractual relationship that exists between a master and a servant whereby both enjoy freedom of action. As between the Crown and military personnel, the only obligation, that of service, rests on the latter. In those circumstances, s. 15 of the Charter simply does not apply. The defendant relies on the Federal Court of Appeal decision in Smith, Kline, and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 584, at 589 D.L.R.:
"Since my approach to s. 15 differs substantially from that taken by the trial judge, I think it appropriate that I should set it out in some detail, even though the result is ultimately the same. In the first place, and in the particular context of this action, it must be said that a short answer to the plaintiffs' s. 14 attack is that, when the alleged 'discrimination' results directly from a voluntarily assumed package of rights and obligations, s. 15 simply does not come into play. A number of simple examples serve to illustrate the point. Certain offices, professions or callings have, as a condition of their exercise, a prohibition to carry out certain other activities open to the citizenry at large. Section 36 of the Judges Act, R.S.C. 1970, c. J-1, is a case in point. Section 15 surely cannot be invoked here for no one is ever obliged to subject himself to the restraint imposed."
[21]
It is true, as the defendant suggests, that the courts, in their discretion, may decline to entertain an application for judicial review on the basis that the administrative review or appeal is just as effective as judicial review to deal with the matter complained of. However, it is clear from the Supreme Court of Canada decision in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  that there is no hard and fast rule requiring a person to exhaust administrative remedies or a statutory right of appeal, unless a statute makes it plain that those remedies or right of appeal are intended to be the exclusive remedy for reviewing the decision of the inferior body.
[22]
In administrative law, the importance of a declaratory judgment, to resolve uncertainty and doubts, is of paramount importance. A public authority may be uncertain of the scope of the powers which it wishes to exercise, or those powers may be disputed by another party. In such circumstances, the dilemma resulting from the public authority taking action at the risk of exceeding its powers, or inaction at the risk of failing to discharge its responsibilities, may be solved by obtaining the authoritative guidance of the court by bringing a declaratory action. Of equal importance, is the public benefit which ensues when an individual, whose interests are potentially prejudiced, is able to obtain, in advance, a judicial declaration of the legal position.
[23]
The value of a declaratory judgment, and the necessity of making it available to aggrieved citizens, has been unquestionably recognized in common law.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the Supreme Court of Canada dealt with the question of declaratory judgments. In that case, a prisoner sought a declaration that his mail should be forwarded to him unopened. Dickson, J., on behalf of the court, said at p. 388:
"Declaratory relief is a remedy neither constrained by form nor bounded by substantive content, which avails persons sharing a legal relationship, in respect of which a 'real issue' concerning the relative interests of each has been raised and falls to be determined."
[24]
In the Solosky decision, the court cited with approval the decision of Lord Denning, M.R., in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 571:
"... if a substantial question exists which one person has a real interest to raise, and the other to oppose, then the court has a discretion to resolve it by a declaration, which it will exercise if there is good reason for so doing."
[25]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  a case also relied upon by the Supreme Court  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the House of Lords stated at 433:
"A person whose freedom of action is challenged can always come to the court to have his rights and position clarified, subject always, of course, to the right of the court in exercise of its judicial discretion to refuse relief in the circumstances of the case."
[26]
Although the declaratory judgment is a discretionary remedy, the court's jurisdiction to entertain such an action is not ousted by the existence of other administrative remedies which the aggrieved party has failed to exhaust.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 4 Man.R.(2d) 87, affirmed [1981] 1 W.W.R. 696; 7 Man.R.(2d) 181 (Man. C.A.), the court held that a complainant who was forced to retire at age 65 pursuant to a collective agreement, could apply to the court for a declaration that the retirement provision was in violation of the Manitoba Human Rights Act, S.M. 1974, c. 65. The complainant was not, in the court's opinion, limited to arbitration under the collective agreement or the complaint procedures and relief provided under the Human Rights Act. The court thoroughly canvassed the issue of whether it had jurisdiction to make a declaratory order with respect to an interpretation of the Manitoba Human Rights Act, although the complainant had failed to exhaust an alternate remedy available to her pursuant to the Act. Hamilton, J., came to the following conclusion at pp. 448-449 W.W.R.:
"It may be conceded, without reference to authority, that this general right to access to the courts and the right to have a speedy interpretation of a statute or a contract may be abrogated by specific legislation. If parliament or the legislature believes that questions between citizens should be decided in some other way, it may so legislate. An example of that type of legislation is the Labour Relations Act, which initially provides for a method of settling disputes that does not involve the courts.
"The Human Rights Act provides other means whereby a person may have his or her complaint aired but, as I have indicated, that Act does not appear to give exclusive jurisdiction to the Human Rights Commission or, conversely, does not oust the inherent common law or historic jurisdiction of the court to receive applications and hear complaints of aggrieved citizens. It is, nevertheless, the case, and this again, I think, can be stated without the necessity of referring to legal authority, that the courts are reluctant to exercise jurisdiction, even though they may possess it, if there is an alternate or preliminary remedy available to the citizen. The reason for this, no doubt, is to leave to the citizen a less technical or legal and sometimes more expeditious and less costly means of obtaining settlement of his grievance, without what some perceive to be the more difficult or costly involvement of counsel and the courts."
[27]
Accordingly, I am satisfied that this Court does have jurisdiction to entertain the action brought by the plaintiff by way of his statement of claim. I do not accept the defendant's contention that this jurisdiction is ousted by the existence of an alternate remedy available to the plaintiff, but, of which he did not avail himself.
[28]
The issue of whether this court should exercise its discretion and grant the declaratory relief sought by the plaintiff, is a matter for the trial judge alone to decide, based upon the merits of the case. But for the foregoing reasons, I refuse to strike out the plaintiff's statement of claim on the grounds that it is an abuse of process of this court or that this court lacks jurisdiction to entertain the action.
[29]
I turn now to the question of whether the plaintiff's statement of claim discloses a reasonable cause of action.
[30]
The issue raised by the plaintiff in his statement of claim is simply this: are the provisions of the National Defence Act and the Queen's Orders and Regulations passed pursuant to that Act, which provide for a mandatory retirement age of 47 for the plaintiff, constitutionally valid.
[31]
The Constitution Act 1982, is the supreme law in this country. Section 52(1) of the Act is unequivocal:
"52(1) The Constitution of Canada is the supreme law of Canada, and any law that is inconsistent with the provisions of the Constitution is, to the extent of the inconsistency, of no force or effect."
[32]
The effect of this provision is that all legislative enactments passed by Parliament and the legislatures are required to conform with the provisions of the Constitution Act, including the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. Every legislative enactment may be the subject of judicial scrutiny, and may, at any time, be examined to ensure that it meets the requirements and standards prescribed by the Charter.
[33]
The principle, which has developed at common law, that the Crown has no contractual or other obligation to members of the Armed Forces, does not reduce the supremacy of the Charter. The National Defence Act and the Queen's Orders and Regulations for the Canadian Forces are not exempted from judicial examination for the purpose of determining whether their provisions violate the Charter, and if they do, to be declared of no force and effect. It would indeed be alarming if there was no way in which the constitutional validity of these legislative enactments could be brought within the scope of the judicial process. Such a question of constitutionality simply cannot be immunized from judicial review by denying those persons subject to the legislation the right to challenge it. The courts have proven themselves tenacious to assert their jurisdiction where questions of constitutional validity and statutory interpretation are involved.
[34]
The defendant has impressed upon this court the unique character of the relationship between armed forces personnel and the Crown, which involves the abandonment of civilian status and the giving up of many civil rights of an ordinary person. Based on that unique quality, this Court is asked to find that s. 15 of the Charter, cannot be invoked by the plaintiff because he voluntarily assumed this "armed forces" package or rights and obligations.
[35]
I am unable to make such a finding. To do so would, in my opinion, denigrate the whole purpose of the Charter and would be contrary to the liberal interpretation which that document deserves. The defendant cannot take refuge in any kind of exception or rule of immunity derived from the common law so as to avoid giving effect to the Charter. I am not persuaded the voluntary assumption of a profession means that one impliedly agrees to become subjected, without question, to all the rules which the governing body of that profession might choose to enact. An individual who voluntarily enters into a profession or office does not automatically forfeit his rights under the Charter. Every individual in Canada is guaranteed the equality provisions of s. 15 and the defendant has failed to provide me with any evidence that would lead me to hold otherwise.
[36]
I distinguish the decision of the Federal Court of Appeal in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . In that case, the respondent had been dismissed from the armed forces on the ground of her admitted homosexuality. The respondent brought an action by way of statement of claim for an order setting aside the dismissal and for damages. The Crown made application to strike out the respondent's statement of claim. The application was rejected by the Federal Court, Trial Division, but allowed by the Federal Court of Appeal. The distinction between the case at bar and the Sylvestre case, is that, in the latter, the respondent was unable to rely on the provisions of s. 15 of the Charter, as it was not in effect on the date of her alleged wrongful dismissal from the armed forces.
[37]
I am of the view s. 15 of the Charter may be applicable to the facts of this case. Agreed, there are legislative enactments in effect which have been found to violate the Charter, but which, at the same time, have been held to fall within the saving provisions of s. 1. This perhaps may be the case with the impugned legislative provisions in this proceeding, but that requires a judicial determination.
[38]
This leads me to my final point, and it relates to my previous conclusion, that the plaintiff is not barred from seeking his relief in this Court, even though he has not exhausted other remedies available to him. It is this: the relief which the plaintiff seeks, a declaration as to the constitutional validity of the impugned legislation, is only available to him from this Court. The constitutional issue, in my opinion, falls outside the jurisdiction of the statutory adjudicative machinery which the plaintiff would normally use for redress of a grievance. Therefore, the administrative review provided for in the Queen's Orders and Regulations is not adequate to deal with the issue raised by the plaintiff in his statement of claim.
[39]
Accordingly, I am satisfied that the plaintiff's statement of claim does disclose a reasonable cause of action. I would not strike out the plaintiff's statement of claim or any of the grounds put forward by the defendant.
[40]
The defendant's motion is dismissed with costs.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/slg
[End of document]