[1]
Jerome, A.C.J.
: Judgment in this matter was rendered on January 17, 1996. At the original hearing, I indicated that the parties may want to examine the written reasons before making representations with respect to remedy or certification. The applicant wrote to the Registry on February 6, 1996, to request that the following question be certified: "Does the absence of procedural rights in a criminal trial where the death penalty may be imposed constitute persecution within the meaning of the definition of a Convention refugee?"
[2]
Section 83(1) of the
Immigration Act
requires that only "serious questions of general importance" be certified. Similar language was interpreted in the Ontario High Court of Justice in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . Catzman, J., found that rule 62.02(5)(b) of the
Ontario Rules of Civil Procedure
"contemplates issues of broad significance or general application that are felt to warrant resolution by a higher level of judicial authority" (supra at p. 575). The Federal Court of Appeal has relied on that reasoning and has added that the issue to be certified must also be determinative of the appeal (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  the Federal Court of Appeal was asked to determine whether the possibility of facing capital punishment if returned to the country of origin should be considered as prosecution, which is valid, or persecution based on one of the enumerated Convention grounds, which would warrant consideration of the accused as a refugee. It was determined that an ordinary law of general application should be presumed valid and neutral until the claimant shows that the law is persecutory.
[4]
I am also not convinced that the answer to the proposed question would determine the appeal. Indeed, any impact on the outcome of this case is speculative in the extreme. The applicant, a schizophrenic, is presently a patient at the Queen Street Mental Health Centre in Toronto. He was sent there after having been found not guilty by reason of insanity of the murder of a coworker in January, 1992. For him to get out of that institution he requires a favourable review from the Ontario Criminal Code Review Board. For him to be removed from the country, a separate application for removal would then have to take place.
[5]
Finally, there is no evidence that Chinese criminal procedure differs from "ordinary laws of general application," nor was any argument presented to counter the presumption of validity or neutrality.
[6]
In my view, it would not be appropriate in this instance to certify this question for consideration by the Federal Court of Appeal and I therefore decline to do so.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Kelli A. Simmonds/saf
[End of document]