Reasons For Order
[1]
Cullen, J.
: This is an application for judicial review, pursuant to leave granted by Mr. Justice Teitelbaum, from a decision of a Credible Basis Tribunal of the Convention Refugee Determination Division ("the Tribunal") dated March 17, 1992. The Tribunal determined that the applicant, Hermes Ccanto, did not have a credible basis to his refuge claim pursuant to s. 46.01(6) of the
Immigration Act
, R.S.C. 1985 c. I-2 (as it stood prior to the amendments of Bill C-86) ("the
Act
"). The applicant seeks an order setting aside the Tribunal's decision and the subsequent deportation order (dated May 19, 1992) and referring the matter back to a differently constituted Tribunal.
Background
[2]
The applicant is a citizen of Peru who is claiming to be a Convention refugee on the basis of his political opinion and his membership in a particular social group.
[3]
From December, 1983 to December, 1987, the applicant was employed in the Municipal Development Corporation in the Department of Huancavelica, one of the emergency zones in Peru. In 1986, after the ARPA Party took power, new management personnel for the applicant's department were put in charge.
[4]
In late 1987, the applicant and two of his colleagues made a confidential report to the General Inspector of the Corporation denouncing the incidents of corruption and wrongdoing of which they had knowledge. As a result of this report, the applicant and one of his colleagues were terminated (the third had already left the Corporation) and were slandered as members of the Shining Path, a known terrorist group.
[5]
On January 15, 1988, one of his colleagues was arrested and accused of being a terrorist. On January 24, 1988, he was arrested and held for seven days. He testified that during this time he was beaten and held under inhumane conditions. He was released due to the intervention of his family. He indicated he was threatened with retaliation if he revealed what had occurred but he was not required to report on a regular basis, nor was he officially charged or required to appear in court. He further stated that he continued to be harassed until his departure.
[6]
On March 12, 1988, the applicant obtained a passport upon paying a bribe, something he said was common in Peru, and on April 1, 1988, he left Peru for Italy. He travelled to Italy via Canada, where he remained for four or five hours but did not claim refugee status at the time because he was not well. While in Italy, with four of his siblings, he felt like he was under surveillance, particularly when he was stopped by police to check his I.D. He was informed by his mother, while he was in Italy, that there were two occasions when the civilian police in Peru had come looking for him. He alleges he did not make a refugee claim in Italy because he did not feel secure there.
[7]
The applicant arrived in Canada on August 17, 1988 on a visitor's visa, but did not immediately make a refugee claim because he did not feel well. His visa expired on August 30, 1988, and he made a claim for refugee status on November 18, 1988. He talked to his mother in Peru two weeks before the hearing held on February 11, 1992, but no mention was made of the police looking for him.
The Tribunal's Decision
[8]
The applicant submitted several items of documentary evidence at the hearing concerning the human rights record in Peru and the success rate of Peruvian refugee claimants in Canada (Application Record. pp. 25-68), as well as a psychiatric report to corroborate his subjective fear (Application Record, pp. 22-24).
[9]
The Tribunal delivered its decision orally upon the resumption of the hearing on March 17, 1992 (Application Record, pp. 134-139). It properly stated the test to be met was "whether there is any credible or trustworthy evidence on which the Refugee Division might determine Mr. Ccanto to be a Convention refugee", and properly placed the burden on Mr. Ccanto to show that his claim had a credible basis.
[10]
The Tribunal did not doubt the documentary evidence with respect to the human rights record in Peru. Considering the statistical survey submitted and the numbers of Peruvian claimants, the Tribunal noted the high credible basis rate, and that every case is concluded on its merits. The Tribunal then considered the psychiatric report of Doctor Fornizari and noted that he only saw the applicant on two occasions, at the suggestion of counsel, and the report contains a "clinical impression" as opposed to any sort of opinion. Further, the Tribunal noted that the trustworthiness of his report was tied in with the credibility of the applicant, since the report was solely based on subjective accounts of the applicant's story. The Tribunal accorded the report little weight, based in part on the fact that it did not contain any information about the applicant's stay in Italy, instead stating that the applicant arrived in Canada in August, 1988.
[11]
The Tribunal then went on to consider the applicant's credibility. Overall, it did not find the applicant's evidence to be trustworthy. It pointed to the evidence from the applicant that he felt he was being followed or watched and found this to be "speculative and self-serving testimony based on no credible evidence". It further noted that although he feared for his family's safety in Peru, the applicant's family had travelled to and from Italy in the previous year without any difficulty. Similarly, the Tribunal noted that the applicant renewed his passport while in Canada without any difficulty.
[12]
The Tribunal noted that there is a new government in Peru, but I do not think that fact played an important role in his decision. The Tribunal found that the applicant's evidence was "... speculative, self-serving and implausible, and based on generalizations". It also found "... Mr. Ccanto exaggerated his evidence and then changed it on questioning". To support this, the Tribunal used as an example his conflicting answers to the issue of whether he was wanted by the police in Peru. In all, the Tribunal found that his testimony was so untrustworthy that its lack of credibility affected the entire claim, citing
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.)). Thus, it found that there was no credible or trustworthy evidence on which the Refugee Division might determine him to be a Convention refugee.
Applicant's Position
[13]
The applicant asserts that he has presented plausible and consistent testimony on each of the elements of the definition of Convention refugee in s. 2(1) of the
Act
, which testimony was corroborated by evidence accepted by the Tribunal. He submits that under s. 46 of the
Act
, the applicant is to receive the benefit of the presumption of truthfulness and the benefit of the doubt. Similarly, he argues that the Tribunal's conclusion that the applicant presented no credible or trustworthy evidence is unsupported by adequate reasons.
[14]
With respect to the argument that the Tribunal erred in exceeding its jurisdiction, the applicant states that the Tribunal's statement that all such cases are decided "on the merits" clearly shows that the Tribunal did not understand its mandate as a first level hearing.
[15]
The applicant asserts that the documentary evidence, particularly hearing exhibit P-12 (Application Record, page 62), is credible evidence supporting a prospective fear of persecution. Further, the applicant submits that the Tribunal generally failed to comprehend the evidence filed, and relied on irrelevant considerations, such as his parents visit to Italy, to reach the decision.
[16]
With respect to the problem of the interpretation, the applicant argues that the Tribunal should have done more than merely ask him if he was satisfied with the quality of the interpreter. He suggests that it was the duty of the Tribunal to hold an inquiry into the competency of the interpreter when it was raised at the hearing.
Respondent's Position
[17]
The respondent submits that the Tribunal properly stated and applied the test for determining whether the applicant's claim had a credible basis. It submits that the Tribunal properly assessed the evidence and drew the necessary inferences to determine the credibility, or lack thereof, of the applicant's claim.
[18]
With respect to the allegation that the Tribunal exceeded its jurisdiction by referring to the merits of the case, the respondent noted that the context of the comment was within the Tribunal's review of the statistics presented by the applicant. Thus, it stated that the reference to the merits of the case referred to the cases summarized in the document.
[19]
Concerning the documentary evidence, the respondent notes that such evidence alone cannot support a credible basis finding. The applicant must adduce some evidence of a factual nexus between his personal situation and the general human rights record of the country.
[20]
With regard to the interpretation problem, the respondent submits that the Tribunal satisfied itself that there was not a problem and that the applicant had not adduced any evidence that there was any prejudice or infringement of his right to a fair hearing because of the alleged difficulty.
Analysis
[21]
Dealing first with the problems with the interpreter,
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R.(2d) 284 (F.C.A.) states that problems with the interpretation at a hearing must be resolved by some form of inquiry. However, nothing as formal as a voir dire as in criminal trial is required. All that is required is that the adjudicator is satisfied that the applicant can adequately express himself through the interpreter.
[22]
In this case, the adjudicator, the Tribunal member, the case presenting officer, the interpreter, counsel for the applicant and the applicant all addressed the question of the problems in the interpretation. After comments from each, the adjudicator asked the applicant (page 94 of the Application Record):
"Adjudicator: Do you think the interpreter's been making errors in the translation?
Person Concerned: I don't believe that's the case up to now, but in some occasion, I have to repeat to him what I'm trying to say."
And later the I.R.B. Member asked (at page 95):
"I.R.B. Member: Mr. Ccanto, I'm not clear what your position is in this matter. Are you content with the interpreter or not?
Person Concerned: Well, I could say yes.
I.R.B. Member: But ... Could you say more clearly? That is a little ambiguous.
Person Concerned: I believe that the gentleman is okay."
[23]
After this inquiry, the hearing resumed. Apparently the applicant was satisfied, the adjudicator accepted this, and appears to have fulfilled his duty from his point of view.
[24]
The Tribunal's role in assessing the credible basis of an application for refugee status under the
Act
has been defined by the Federal Court of Appeal in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R.(2d) 43; 74 D.L.R.(4th) 313 (F.C.A.), at pp. 44-45:
"[T]he tribunal is not to make findings of fact but is limited to determining the existence of credible or trustworthy evidence on each of the necessary elements of the claim such that the Refugee Division might find the applicant to be a Convention refugee. The primary role of the tribunal is to test the credibility of the evidence; in performing that role it is entitled to draw such inferences as are necessary for the purpose, as for example by determining that all or part of a witness' story is unreliable because it is implausible or because the witness has contradicted himself.
"When it comes to the secondary role, however, the tribunal is not to draw inferences or conclusions with regard to the existence of the essential elements of the claim; its only function is to determine whether the Refugee Division, acting on the evidence found to be credible or trustworthy, might reasonably conclude in the applicant's favour."
[25]
Thus, the test may be stated in two parts as in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R.(2d) 241 (F.C.A.) at p. 242; first "... whether there was
any
credible evidence ..." and secondly "... given the presence of
some
credible evidence,
might
the Refugee Division, after a full hearing, determine the applicant to be Convention Refugee." (Emphasis in original).
[26]
As pointed out above, the Tribunal stated the test correctly. Once this was done, the Tribunal then had to apply it. It was open to the Tribunal to believe or disbelieve what the applicant said and to assess and weigh the evidence before it with respect to the credibility of the claim. It was also open to the Tribunal to find the applicant lacking in credibility not disbelieving everything he said and thus find no credible basis. ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra).
[27]
However, the Tribunal is under a clear obligation to express any negative finding of credibility in "... clear and unmistakable terms" (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R.(2d) 199 (F.C.A.)). This generally includes the obligation to give examples or illustrations of its basis for not accepting the applicant's testimony (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Tribunal found that the applicant's testimony lacked credibility. Similarly, the Tribunal attempted to demonstrate why it disbelieved much of what the applicant stated, and why it found his evidence "speculative, self-serving and implausible ..." Based on my reading of the reasons and upon hearing argument, I believe the Tribunal did satisfy the requirement laid out in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra. As stated by Madame Justice Simpson in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, at page 2:
"... a finding against credibility will normally be sufficient:
- If it is clear that the claimant was not believed. The word credible need not appear if a reasonable synonym such as unreliable or untrustworthy is employed.
- If illustrations or examples are provided with the evidence."
[29]
The Tribunal outlined various parts of the applicant's testimony it did not believe. Although it did not contradict this testimony with other evidence, it is clear from the reasons that the Tribunal, given the totality of the evidence and the inferences it drew, had reason not to believe the testimony. This is sufficient in law given the circumstances of this case.
Decision
[30]
It is clear that there were some problems with the interpretation but on each occasion where difficulties were detected these were resolved. The interpreter gave an explanation for one of the errors which was really use by the applicant of the wrong word to describe a person's occupation.
[31]
As emphasized by counsel for the respondent, the Tribunal found the facts as described by the applicant to be implausible and proceeded to describe the trip to Italy, the stopover of four hours in Canada, the delay in applying for refugee status until the visitor's visa had expired. Also the Tribunal found the applicant's worry about his parents to be implausible because the family was able to travel to Italy on a visit and later returned home. There was scepticism about the applicant's alleged concern about lack of safety in Italy. The facts are that the applicant did get a passport in Peru by paying a bribe, as he frankly admits is the custom, and he obtained the passport by attending in person. The Tribunal noticed this fact. Fear, therefore, is implausible because if the authorities were seeking him out, the last thing they would allow was the issuing of a passport so he could leave. Again, his passport was renewed later.
[32]
If the applicant had a subjective fear there was nothing in the evidence to support it, and this is demonstrated by his movements from one country to another without applying for refugee status in Italy and waiting several months before applying in Canada.
[33]
The Tribunal did not give much if any weight to the psychiatrist's report and they said why. I might have decided differently but in a judicial review I have only to determine if the Tribunal had some reason for deciding as they did and it is not the court's role to substitute its decision for that of the Tribunal.
[34]
Counsel for the respondent conceded the Tribunal's finding of inconsistency could not be explained or upheld. I agree but this is not sufficient to warrant the matter being referred back to another tribunal.
[35]
This application is dismissed.
Application dismissed.
Editor: David Weir/dlr
[End of document]