[1]
Denault, J.
: On May 26, 1991, Wahid Khalil Jaber Baroud [see footnote 1] arrived at the Pearson International Airport. Upon his arrival, he informed the immigration authorities that he had been a member of Fatah, an organization within the Palestinian Liberation Organization (the PLO) and claimed status as a Convention refugee. He was subsequently detained by immigration officials acting under the authority of a security certificate signed and filed by the Solicitor General of Canada and the Minister of Citizenship and Immigration in accordance with s. 40.1 of the
Immigration Act
(the
Act
) which reads as follows:
"40.1(1) Notwithstanding anything in this Act, where the Minister and the Solicitor General of Canada are of the opinion, based on security or criminal intelligence reports received and considered by them, that a person, other than a Canadian citizen or permanent resident, is a person described in subparagraph 19(1)(c.1)(ii), paragraph 19(1)(c.2), (d), (e), (f), (g), (j), (k) or (l) or subparagraph 19(2)(a.1)(ii), they may sign and file a certificate to that effect with an immigration officer, a senior immigration officer or an adjudicator.
"(2) Where a certificate is signed and filed in accordance with subs. (1),
(a) an inquiry under this Act concerning the person in respect of whom the certificate is filed shall not be commenced, or if commenced shall be adjourned, until the determination referred to in paragraph (4)(d) has been made; and
(b) a senior immigration officer or an adjudicator shall, notwithstanding s. 23 or 103 but subject to subs. (7.1), detain or make an order to detain the person named in the certificate until the making of the determination.
"(3) Where a certificate referred to in subs. (1) is filed in accordance with that subsection, the Minister shall
(a) forthwith cause a copy of the certificate to be referred to the Federal Court for a determination as to whether the certificate should be quashed; and
(b) within three days after the certificate has been filed, cause a notice to be sent to the person named in the certificate informing the person that a certificate under this section has been filed and that following a reference to the Federal Court a deportation order may be made against the person.
"(4) Where a certificate is referred to the Federal Court pursuant to subs. (3), the Chief Justice of that court or a judge of that court designated by the Chief Justice for the purposes of this section shall
(a) examine within seven days, 'in camera', the security or criminal intelligence reports considered by the Minister and the Solicitor General and hear any other evidence or information that may be presented by or on behalf of those Ministers and may, on the request of the Minister or the Solicitor General, hear all or part of such evidence or information in the absence of the person named in the certificate and any counsel representing the person where, in the opinion of the Chief Justice or the designated judge, as the case may be, the evidence or information should not be disclosed on the grounds that the disclosure would be injurious to national security or to the safety of persons;
(b) provide the person named in the certificate with a statement summarizing such information available to the Chief Justice or the designated judge, as the case may be, as will enable the person to be reasonably informed of the circumstances giving rise to the issue of the certificate, having regard to whether, in the opinion of the Chief Justice or the designated judge, as the case may be, the information should not be disclosed on the grounds that the disclosure would be injurious to national security or to the safety of persons;
(c) provide the person named in the certificate with a reasonable opportunity to be heard;
(d) determine whether the certificate filed by the Minister and the Solicitor General is reasonable on the basis of the evidence and information available to the Chief Justice or the designated judge, as the case may be, and, if found not to be reasonable, quash the certificate; and
(e) notify the Minister, the Solicitor General and the person named in the certificate of the determination made pursuant to paragraph (d).
"(5) For the purposes of subs. (4), the Chief Justice or the designated judge may, subject to subs. (5.1), receive, accept and base the determination referred to in paragraph (4)(d) on such evidence or information as the Chief Justice or the designated judge sees fit, whether or not the evidence or information is or would be admissible in a court of law.
"(5.1) For the purposes of subs. (4),
(a) the Minister or the Solicitor General of Canada may make an application, 'in camera' and in the absence of the person named in the certificate and any counsel representing the person, to the Chief Justice or the designated judge for the admission of information obtained in confidence from the government or an institution of a foreign state or from an international organization of states or an institution thereof;
(b) the Chief Justice or the designated judge shall, 'in camera' and in the absence of the person named in the certificate and any counsel representing the person,
(i) examine that information, and
(ii) provide counsel representing the Minister or the Solicitor General of Canada with a reasonable opportunity to be heard as to whether the information is relevant but should not be disclosed to the person named in the certificate on the grounds that the disclosure would be injurious to national security or to the safety of persons;
(c) that information shall be returned to counsel representing the Minister or the Solicitor General of Canada and shall not be considered by the Chief Justice or the designated judge in making the determination referred to in paragraph (4)(d), if
(i) the Chief Justice or the designated judge determines
(A) that the information is not relevant, or
(B) that the information is relevant and should be summarized in the statement to be provided pursuant to paragraph (4)(b) to the person named in the certificate, or
(ii) the Minister or the Solicitor General of Canada withdraws the application; and
(d) if the Chief Justice or the designated judge determines that the information is relevant but should not be disclosed to the person named in the certificate on the grounds that the disclosure would be injurious to national security or to the safety of persons, the information shall not be summarized in the statement provided pursuant to paragraph (4)(b) to the person named in the certificate but may be considered by the Chief Justice or the designated judge in making the determination referred to in paragraph (4)(d).
"(6) A determination under paragraph (4)(d) is not subject to appeal or review by any court.
"(7) Where a certificate has been reviewed by the Federal Court pursuant to subs. (4) and has not been quashed pursuant to paragraph (4)(d),
(a) the certificate is conclusive proof that the person named in the certificate is a person described in subparagraph 19(1)(c.1)(ii), paragraph 19(1)(c.2), (d), (e), (f), (g), (j), (k) or (l) or subparagraph 19(2)(a.1)(ii); and
(b) the person named in the certificate shall, notwithstanding s. 23 or 103 but subject to subs. (7.1), continue to be detained until the person is removed from Canada.
"(7.1) The Minister may order the release of a person who is named in the certificate that is signed and filed in accordance with subs. (1) in order to permit the departure from Canada of the person, regardless of whether the Chief Justice or the designated judge has yet made the determination referred to in paragraph (4)(d).
"(8) Where a person is detained under subs. (7) and is not removed from Canada within 120 days after the making of the removal order relating to that person, the person may apply to the Chief Justice of the Federal Court or to a judge of the Federal Court designated by the Chief Justice for the purposes of this section for an order under subs. (9).
"(9) On an application referred to in subs. (8) the Chief Justice or the designated judge may, subject to such terms and conditions as the Chief Justice or designated judge deems appropriate, order that the person be released from detention if the Chief Justice or designated judge is satisfied that
(a) the person will not be removed from Canada within a reasonable time;
and
(b) the person's release would not be injurious to national security or to the safety of persons.
"(10) On the hearing of an application referred to in subs. (8), the Chief Justice or the designated judge shall
(a) examine, 'in camera', and in the absence of the person making the application and any counsel representing that person, any evidence or information presented to the Minister in relation to national security or the safety of persons;
(b) provide the person making the application with a statement summarizing the evidence or information available to the Chief Justice or designated judge in relation to national security or the safety of persons having regard to whether, in the opinion of the Chief Justice or the designated judge, as the case may be, the evidence or information should not be disclosed on the grounds that the disclosure would be injurious to national security or to the safety of persons; and
(c) provide the person making the application with a reasonable opportunity to be heard.
"(11) For the purposes of subs. (10), the Chief Justice or the designated judge may receive and accept such evidence or information as the Chief Justice or the designated judge sees fit, whether or not the evidence or information is or would be admissible in a court of law."
[2]
The security certificate stated that, in the opinion of the Minister and the Solicitor General of Canada, the respondent did not qualify for admission to Canada because he is a person described in ss. 19(1)(f)(ii) and 19(1)(f)(iii)(B) of the
Act
which read as follows:
"19(1) No person shall be granted admission who is a member of any of the following classes:
(f) persons who there are reasonable grounds to believe
(ii) have engaged in terrorism, or
(iii) are or were members of an organization that there are reasonable grounds to believe is or was engaged in
(B) terrorism,
except persons who have satisfied the Minister that their admission would not be detrimental to the national interest;"
[3]
Pursuant to the procedural requirements set out in s. 40.1(3) of the
Act
, a copy of the certificate was referred to this court for a determination as to whether it should be quashed and a notice of the filing of the certificate was sent to the respondent, informing him that a deportation order may be made against him.
[4]
As the designated judge in this matter, I examined, "in camera", and in the absence of the respondent and his counsel, the security intelligence reports and other evidence presented to me by the Minister and the Solicitor General, in accordance with s. 40.1(4) of the
Act
. Pursuant to s. 40.1(4)(b), the respondent was provided with a statement summarizing the information in order to enable him to be reasonably informed of the circumstances giving rise to the issuance of the certificate. This statement summarizing the information (the Statement) excluded any information which could not be disclosed on the grounds that disclosure would be injurious to national security or the safety of persons.
Issue
[5]
Pursuant to s. 40.1(4)(d) of the
Act
, the issue to be determined is whether the certificate filed by the Minister and the Solicitor General naming the respondent as an inadmissible person described in ss. 19(1)(f)(ii) and 19(1)(f)(iii)(B) of the
Act
is reasonable on the basis of the evidence and information available to this court. Therefore, the role of this court is not to substitute its decision for that of the Minister and the Solicitor General nor is it to find that they were correct in their assessment of the evidence presented to them but rather to find whether or not, based on the information and evidence presented to this court, the Ministers' certificate is a reasonable one.
[6]
Accordingly, this court must decide whether it was reasonable for the Ministers, in light of the circumstances of this case, to issue a security certificate identifying the respondent as a member of the inadmissible class of persons 1) described in s. 19(1)(f)(ii) of the
Act
as a person who there are reasonable grounds to believe has engaged in terrorism, or 2) whether the respondent falls within s. 19(1)(f)(iii)(B) of the
Act
as a person who there are reasonable grounds to believe is or was a member of an organization that there are reasonable grounds to believe is or was engaged in terrorism.
Standard Of Proof
[7]
With respect to the standard of proof to be applied in a matter such as this one, ss. 19(1)(f)(ii) and 19(1)(f)(iii)(B) of the
Act
require evidence of reasonable grounds to believe that a person has engaged in terrorism or, reasonable grounds to believe the person is or was a member of an organization that there are reasonable grounds to believe is or was engaged in terrorism. With respect to s. 19(1)(f)(ii) of the
Act
, the legislation does not require proof that the person actually engaged in terrorism but rather, it is sufficient to show that there are
reasonable grounds to believe
that the person has engaged in terrorism.
[8]
Turning to clause 19(1)(f)(iii)(B) of the
Act
, it must be shown that there are
reasonable grounds to believe
that the person named in the certificate is or was a member of an organization that there are
reasonable grounds to believe
that
it
is or was engaged in terrorism. This does not mean that there must be proof that the organization is a terrorist organization nor that the respondent is or was an actual member of such an organization but only that there are
reasonable grounds to believe
he is or was a member of such an organization. Although the distinction may be a fine one, it is relevant to the determination of the reasonableness of the security certificate.
[9]
Therefore, I am of the view, as I have already stated in the
Farahi-Mahdavieh
[see footnote 2] decision, that the proper test to be applied is the one set out in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  member of a subversive organization, stated the following at pages 225 and 226  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> :
"But where the fact to be ascertained on the evidence is whether there are reasonable grounds for such a belief, rather than the existence of the fact itself, it seems to me that to require proof of the fact itself and proceed to determine whether it has been established is to demand the proof of a different fact from that required to be ascertained. It seems to me that the use by the statute of the expression 'reasonable grounds for believing' implies that the fact itself need not be established and that evidence which falls short of proving the subversive character of the organization will be sufficient if it is enough to show reasonable grounds for believing that the organization is one that advocates subversion by force, etc."
[10]
I do not agree with the contention put forth by the respondent's counsel that the test enunciated by this court in
Re Farahi-Mahdavieh
, supra, is not applicable to the case at bar. Although that case dealt with s. 19(1)(g) of the
Act
, the language with respect to the standard of proof is the same. The distinction between past acts referred to in s. 19(1)(f) and future acts referred to s. 19(1)(g) is not relevant with respect to the standard of proof applicable since Parliament saw fit to include the expression "reasonable grounds to believe" in both these categories of inadmissible persons.
Allegations Made By The Canadian
Security Intelligence Service (The
Service)
[11]
In the Statement summarizing the information pursuant to s. 40.1(4)(b) of the
Act
, the Service claims that there are reasonable grounds to believe that: 1) Fatah is an organization that was engaged in terrorism; 2) Force 17 is an organization that was engaged in terrorism; 3) the respondent was a member of Fatah and Force 17; and 4) the respondent has engaged in terrorism. Accordingly, the Service maintains that the respondent is an inadmissible person within the meaning of ss. 19(1)(f)(ii) and 19(1)(f)(iii)(B) of the
Act
.
[12]
The Statement identifies Fatah as the dominant organization within the PLO. According to the Service, Fatah was involved in several terrorist attacks from 1971 to 1991. The Service also maintains that Force 17, a semi-autonomous wing of Fatah which provides personal security for Yasser Arafat and other top Fatah officials, is responsible for security, intelligence and covert activities. The Service states that it has reason to believe that Force 17 has been responsible for a number of acts of terrorism throughout the world.
[13]
It is further maintained that the respondent was a member of both Fatah and Force 17. In September 1989, a German publication called
Terrorismus
[see footnote 4] described the respondent as the most important expert in the field of counterfeiting, specializing in the forgery of travel documents of Middle Eastern and South European countries. According to the Service, information from various sources, of which most cannot be disclosed for reasons of national security, reveal the respondent's activities as a member of Fatah and Force 17.
Evidence Presented By The Respondent
[14]
The respondent exercised his right to be heard and testified on his own behalf in order to oppose the reasonableness of the certificate issued by the Ministers. The expert testimony of Dr. Graff and Dr. Whitaker was heard along with the testimony of Mr. Lambert, an immigration official.
[15]
The respondent, born in the Gaza Strip, admitted having joined Fatah in 1968, at the age of sixteen but denied ever having been a member of Force 17. As a member of Fatah he received training in weapons and military intelligence at a military academy in Algeria. Over the years he performed various tasks for the organization, for example: acting as officer in charge of weapons and supplies in Jordan, gathering intelligence information while working in Fatah's information gathering apparatus, maintaining civil order in Lebanon after the civil war broke out, re-grouping Palestinians who fled to Germany after the massacres of Sabra and Shatila, locating Palestinians who were considered traitors and protecting prominent PLO members.
[16]
While stationed in Greece, the respondent was assigned the task of pursuing Palestinian collaborators who were providing information to the Israelis. He had a falling out with the Palestinian Ambassador to Greece and was eventually deported from that country in 1986. He subsequently returned to Greece in the summer of 1987 where, by his own admission, he was no longer performing any duties for Fatah even though he was receiving a salary from the organization. In cross-examination, when asked why Fatah would continue to pay him even though he was not active within the organization nor was he given any responsibilities or duties, he stated that due to his seniority in the organization and the fact that he possessed confidential information which belonged to the organization, he continued to receive a salary until October 1990, when he left the employ of Fatah. In October 1990, a senior military officer in the organization ordered him to proceed to Iraq and then to Kuwait to join a military scouting unit. He refused to follow this military order because he was unwilling to get involved in Iraq's invasion of Kuwait and in fact openly disagreed with Arafat's support of Iraq's war. He thus left Fatah in October 1990 and stated that he has had no connection with the organization as of that date.
[17]
The respondent stated that he had never been involved in terrorist attacks or the planning of such attacks. He was interrogated by the Service regarding specific incidents in Brussels, Cyprus and Greece however, he denied ever having participated in these acts. During these interviews [see footnote 5] the respondent admitted having joined Fatah where he rose to the rank of captain by 1983. He further admitted being involved in different tasks such as intelligence work and that he continued to receive a salary from the PLO even though he was not on active duty from 1987 to 1990.
The Expert Testimony
[18]
Dr. Graff, an expert in the areas of nationalism, the conception of terrorism, human rights theory and the history of the Palestinian people, testified for the respondent. In essence, Dr. Graff stated that the term "terrorist" or "terrorism" is a pejorative term used to attribute a negative activity to an organization. In fact, he considered it to be a value-laden term used as a major political, rhetorical and polemical device against certain groups or organizations in order to de-legitimize their cause. According to Dr. Graff, the concept of morally illegitimate causes, targets, modes of violence and the use of violence are at the root of the use of the term "terrorism" as a condemnatory term.
[19]
With respect to the legitimacy of the Palestinian cause, Dr. Graff opined that it was in fact a legitimate cause since the Palestinian people have been dominated by a different ethno-cultural community for several years. Their ultimate goal, which he considered to be legitimate, is to exercise their right to self-determination within the territories presently occupied by Israel. Dr. Graff was of the view that, although some of the violence committed by the Palestinians has been morally illegitimate, most of their targets, which consisted mainly of Israeli military forces and armed settlers, were legitimate.
[20]
Dr. Whitaker, an expert in the area of security intelligence apparatus, testified as to the purpose of security intelligence services, the methods used to collect information, the reliability of the information collected and the definition of disinformation. In general terms, Dr. Whitaker stated that the Canadian Security Intelligence Service (CSIS), which offers assessments to the Canadian government regarding threats to the security of the country, is unlike many other intelligence services, since it is not involved with external intelligence gathering but rather, it is concerned with internal security and counter-intelligence. Canada is therefore at a disadvantage because it does not have a specialized central information gathering agency for external intelligence. CSIS must thus rely on allied intelligence agencies for external intelligence. For this reason, the reliability of the information received from allied services is questionable. This is due to the fact that the information received from another country, is first, selectively chosen and second, is processed and interpreted in light of that country's own national interest. Furthermore, CSIS is unable to verify this information which may be characterized as biased.
[21]
Dr. Whitaker further discussed the issue of disinformation, a technical term in the intelligence field which may be defined as a careful selection of information, while not outright falsehoods, is partially true and partially untrue. Disinformation is used to create an impression or an interpretation by imparting a certain bias through selectivity. The overall effect, according to Dr. Whitaker, is to mislead or further a particular foreign policy. Having reviewed CSIS list of alleged Fatah terrorist activities, Dr. Whitaker came to the conclusion that it was an example of disinformation since it gave the reader the impression that Fatah pursued a systematic pattern of terrorism. The list, in Dr. Whitaker's view, failed to draw distinctions between the different incidents, some of which were not terrorist in nature since the targets were military. Furthermore, it is dubious whether some acts were actually committed by Fatah.
Discussion And Analysis
[22]
I would first like to recognize that, within the context of a hearing held pursuant to s. 40.1(4)(c) of the
Act
, it is difficult for the respondent and his counsel to know the case against him and to be fully informed and apprised of the nature of the evidence which formed the basis for the security certificate issued pursuant to s. 40.1(1) of the
Act
. Due to the nature of the inquiry held under s. 40.1(4)(a) of the
Act
and the sensitivity of the information and evidence, which, if disclosed, would be injurious to national security or to the security of persons, the respondent is given little information in order to prepare an adequate "defence". It is important to note however, that the issuance of a security certificate under s. 40.1 of the
Act
applies to persons other than Canadian citizens or permanent resident and refers to inadmissible classes of persons engaged in violence, espionage and subversion. The issues in such cases therefore involve national security interests and the scheme set out in s. 40.1 of the
Act
affords the respondent limited protection, with the exception of the opportunity to be heard.
[23]
As I have mentioned above, my role as the designated judge in this matter is not to determine whether the Minister and the Solicitor General were correct in their assessment of the evidence presented to them but rather, in accordance with s. 40.1(4)(d), I must determine whether the security certificate is reasonable on the basis of the evidence and information available to me; information which, I might add, cannot be the subject of a detailed analysis in this judgment on the grounds that it would be injurious to national security or the security of persons if it were revealed. I would like to underline the fact that, pursuant to s. 40.1(5) of the
Act
, this court may, subject to subsection (5.1), receive, accept and base the determination referred to in paragraph (4)(d) on such evidence and information as this court sees fit, whether or not the evidence or information is or would be admissible in a court of law. Although counsel for the respondent argued that the documents [see footnote 6] relied upon by the Service are biased and unreliable, I have determined that they are admissible on the basis of s. 40.1(5) of the
Act
. I have an obligation to enforce the applicable legislation and, in the context of this hearing, it is not my role to determine whether the section in question is contrary to the rights and liberties guaranteed by the
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
[see footnote 7].
[24]
In the present case, the Ministers are of the opinion that there are reasonable grounds to believe that the respondent is a person who has engaged in terrorism pursuant to s. 19(1)(f)(ii) of the
Act
. In the Statement summarizing the information, the Service maintained that the respondent is an important expert in counterfeiting and specialized in the forgery of travel documents. The interviews conducted by the Service and immigration officials also reveal that they suspect the respondent's participation in three separate incidents, that is, the planning of an attack of an Israeli El Al airliner at the airport in Brussels on July 27, 1980; an attack at Larnaca Marina in Cyprus where three Israeli boaters were killed and; the reasons which caused the Greek authorities to deport the respondent on two occasions.
[25]
Having reviewed all of the evidence and information presented to me by both counsel, it is my view that there are no reasonable grounds to believe that the respondent himself actually engaged in terrorism as stated in s. 19(1)(f)(ii) of the
Act
.
[26]
With respect to the allegation that the respondent is a person who there are reasonable grounds to believe is or was a member of an organization that there are reasonable grounds to believe is or was engaged in terrorism as described in s. 19(1)(f)(iii)(B) of the
Act
, it is apparent from the language used by Parliament in this clause that the net is much wider. That is, the scope of this clause is much broader than s. 19(1)(f)(ii) of the
Act
. In the case at bar, the respondent has openly admitted being a member of Fatah. However, he denied being an expert in the forgery of passports and travel documents and further denied ever being a member of Force 17.
[27]
It should be noted that s. 40.1(5.1) of the
Act
authorizes me to admit into evidence information obtained in confidence from the government or an institution of a foreign state or from an international organization of states of an institution thereof. Thus, taking into consideration the confidential information presented to me "in camera", obtained through human sources and foreign governments or institutions referred to in s. 40.1(5.1) of the
Act
as well as the public information, I must conclude that there were reasonable grounds to believe that the respondent was in fact a member of both Fatah and Force 17.
[28]
Turning now to the question of whether there are reasonable grounds for believing that Fatah and Force 17 are or were engaged in terrorism, I am mindful of the fact that the terms "terrorism" and "terrorist" are not defined in the
Act
. Counsel for the Ministers affirms in her written memorandum that "Like beauty, the image of a terrorist is, to some extent, in the eye of the beholder" [see footnote 8]. While I accept this statement in general terms, it cannot prevent this court from examining whether, in the circumstances of this case, there are reasonable grounds to believe that a person or organizations have engaged in terrorism. Furthermore, I do not accept counsel for the Ministers' contention that the definition of "threats to the security of Canada" [see footnote 9] found in s. 2 of the
Canadian Security Intelligence Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-23, should apply to describe a terrorist organization in this case. While it may be appropriate, in some instances, to refer to a definition contained in a different act in order to properly discern Parliament's meaning and intention with respect to a specific term or word, I do not see fit to do so in the present case [see footnote 10].
[29]
As Parliament did not define the term "terrorism" with respect to the
Immigration Act
, it is not incumbent upon this court to define it. However, for the purposes of this case, I must determine whether there are reasonable grounds to believe that the two organizations in question have engaged in terrorism. According to Dr. Graff, one method of defining "terrorism" would be to examine every act alleged to be terrorist and determine whether the objective, the use of violence, the modes of violence and the targets are legitimate or not. Although Dr. Graff's concerns regarding the labelling of an organization as terrorist are legitimate, it is not within the purview of these proceedings to define the word "terrorism" in those terms.
[30]
I am of the view that the purpose of ss. 19(1)(f)(ii) and 19(1)(f)(iii) of the
Act
, in very general terms, is to prevent the arrival of persons considered to be a danger to this society. The term "terrorism" must therefore receive an unrestrictive interpretation and will unavoidably include the political connotations which it entails. In this regard, I do not accept counsel for the respondent's argument that the disclosed information relied upon by the Service are unreliable and biased. I am satisfied that, in light of the evidence and information presented to me, there exist reasonable grounds to believe that Fatah and Force 17 were engaged in terrorism.
[31]
Having concluded that the respondent was a member of Fatah and Force 17, and having further concluded that there are reasonable grounds to believe that both organizations were engaged in terrorism, I determine the security certificate issued by the Minister of Citizenship and Immigration and the Solicitor General of Canada pursuant to s. 40.1(1) of the
Act
to be reasonable on the basis of the evidence and information available to me.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Jana A. Andersen/klf
Footnotes
1.	For the purposes of this judgment, following a hearing pursuant to s. 40.1(4)(c) of the
Immigration Act
, Wahid Khalil Jaber Baroud will be referred to as the respondent in this matter.
2.
Farahi-Mahdavieh, Re
(1993), 63 F.T.R. 120 (T.D.). See also
Husseini, Re
(1993), 24 Imm. L.R.(2d) 106 (F.C.T.D.) (Cullen, J.).
3.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  N.R. 271 (F.C.A.).
4.	Annexed as Tab C in the Statement.
5.	Summaries of the interviews conducted by the Service are annexed to the Statement provided to the respondent (See Tab B). Summaries of the interviews conducted by the immigration officials during the hearings held pursuant to s. 103 of the
Act
are annexed to the same Statement (See Tab D).
6.	N.C. Livingstone & D. Halevy,
Inside the PLO
(New York: William Morrow and Company Inc, 1990) and Y. Alexander & J. Sinai,
Terrorism: The PLO Connection
(1989).
7.	The respondent has launched an action in this court challenging the constitutional validity, applicability and operability of s. 40.1 of the
Act
(Court File IMM-4914-94).
8.	Submissions prepared by counsel for the Minister of Citizenship and Immigration and the Solicitor General of Canada, dated March 27, 1995, paragraph 23.
9.	2.(c) activities within or relating to Canada directed toward or in support of the threat or use of acts of serious violence against persons or property for the purpose of achieving a political objective within Canada or a foreign state;
10.	Although counsel for the Ministers contends that this definition is generally applied to terrorist organizations, I note that the word "terrorist" does not appear anywhere in the definition contained in the
Canadian Security Intelligence Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-23.
[End of document]