[1]
Hargrave, Prothonotary
: These reasons arise out of the defendants' application, pursuant to rule 471, for inspection of the steering system of the tug "Sea Cap XII".
Background
[2]
On May 11, 1995 the barge "Seaspan 619", in tow of the "Sea Cap XII", struck the Celtic Shipyards' facility in the north arm of the Fraser River. The vessel's owner, Valley Towing Ltd., subsequently commenced this limitation action and on July 31, 1995 obtained an order (the "July order") which, among other things, stayed other litigation, except for the purpose of obtaining security, taxation and payment of costs, constituted a limitation fund and provided that claimants file a defence and/or notice of claim by September 15, 1995, the whole subject to any application to vary the terms of the order.
[3]
The July order was obtained on the affidavit of Randle Hamilton, the plaintiff's general manager, which set out, in part, that the damage "... did not occur with the actual fault or privity on the part of the plaintiff but rather through the act or omission of the person or persons on board.". It now turns out that a jog switch at an aft control station, which is used to control the rudder in place of a ship's wheel, stuck in a hard over position, causing the tug's rudder to stay in a hard over position, the tug thus losing control of the barge.
Motion For Inspection
[4]
Against this background one of the defendants, Celtic Shipyards (1988) Ltd., with the approval of some of the other claimants, brought the present motions for short leave, for production of the manuals and plans relating to the tug's steering system and, pursuant to rule 471, for inspection of both the steering control unit, the jog switch and the whole of the steering system aboard the tug.
[5]
The Celtic Shipyards affidavit material sets out the failure of the jog switch in the steering system, retention of an automated marine steering system expert, written requests for production of material and inspection of both the jog switch steering unit and the steering system aboard the tug and the need that inspection be done before further time has gone by. As to the need for immediate inspection, according to the steering system expert, Paul Wagner, it is his experience that, "... as time passes, the condition of a ship's steering system may change in significant ways through the operation of the ship, routine maintenance thereof, or repairs." and that "Unless my inspection is carried out forthwith, the value and relevance of any observations I may make may become less valuable.".
[6]
On the part of owners, they say that the only change to the steering system of the "Sea Cap XII" has been a removal and replacement of the jog switch, that the original jog switch is in the custody of counsel for the plaintiff and that the "Sea Cap XII" is engaged, on a twenty four hour day basis, seven days a week, over the next month, and therefore can not be made available for inspection without a breach of contractual obligation.
Analysis
[7]
The Associate Chief Justice, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.), looked upon inspection under rule 471 not as an extraordinary occurrence, but rather as a logical part of the normal discovery process, that ought to be broadly interpreted (p. 12), with relevance and benefit being key issues:
"I would rather think that courts should take the approach they do on discovery and disputed discovery questions. If I were presiding at this trial and the questions put to the witness were put, would I consider it to be relevant? I think that is a fair test to apply in the situation of disputed discovery questions when a witness says: 'I won't answer that question on discovery' and I am called upon to judge whether he should be ordered to do so or not, I should be able to ask myself: 'Well, if I were presiding at the trial, would it be relevant?'
"Why then should we not take the approach that if I were presiding at the trial and came to the impasse that exists here, would an inspection be beneficial? In resolving this matter, would I benefit from an inspection?
"My answer is yes, and I see no reason not the order the inspection now." (p. 13)
[8]
Mr. Justice Walsh, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), considered a request to inspect the ship's engines in contemplation of general average proceedings. He felt inspection would be a useful and desirable procedure, causing little harm to the vessel owners, possibly facilitating settlement and in any event necessary should the proceedings go ahead (p. 1112).
[9]
There is, however, one key proviso and that is that a court is also entitled to look at the balance of convenience, for the inspection must be done either without inconvenience or with a minimum of inconvenience: see for example
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.), and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.), both 1975 decisions of Mr. Justice Walsh.
[10]
The owner of the "Sea Cap XII" says that the balance of convenience would be to wait until mid-September, when all the claimants have come into the limitation action and then hold one inspection of the steering unit and the tug, in which all of the claimants might participate. Now this would be sensible if I were convinced that the condition of the steering system aboard the tug would remain static. However the opinion of the defendants' expert is that inspection ought to take place now because significant changes may take place as time passes.
[11]
In addition, I have in mind that the progress of a limitation action does not necessarily follow the course of an ordinary action. In particular, discovery ought to be given by the plaintiff at an early stage in order to enable the defendants to decide whether either to contest the proceedings, or to allow limitation by default. Indeed, it is the English practice that a plaintiff in a limitation action will often give voluntary discovery and answer informal interrogatories even before commencing the limitation action (see for example Meeson on
Admiralty Jurisdiction and Practice,
Lloyds of London Press, 1993 at p. 238). This early preemptive procedure may well become even more important in the event that Canada either adopts the
London Limitation Convention
of 1979, or enacts parallel legislation. It is a sensible procedure, which diligent parties ought to adopt, first because it avoids waste of time during the interim period when claimants must decide whether to file defences to contest limitation, and further, it may also offer the practical possibility of avoiding a full limitation trial. In the present instance early inspection will make good use of the interim waiting period and could result in earlier resolution of the limitation issue.
[12]
The plaintiff, the owner of the "Sea Cap XII", has pointed out both that the steering control unit is in safe keeping and that to make the vessel available for inspection would be inconvenient. These are reasonable submissions. However the "Sea Cap XII" is not a sea going tug, but rather a coastal vessel and indeed, is often employed locally.
[13]
Given the utility of inspection at this time, I have allowed it, provided that the expert for Celtic Shipyards work around the tug's schedule and attend at the tug at a time when the tug is not involved in actual towing operations. Such an inspection may well give Celtic Shipyards a better idea of whether to contest the limitation proceedings, or conversely, show to the vessel owner that a compromise is preferable to a failed limitation proceeding. Thus there may be benefit to both sides.
[14]
In order to deal with the legitimate concern of Valley Towing, that their tug not be subject to multiple inspections, counsel for Celtic Shipyards will give notice of the inspection to the presently known claimants, who may have their experts attend at the same time.
[15]
Those claimants who have not been diligent and fail to take the present opportunity to inspect, may not inspect the tug and steering unit at a later date. Instead they may have to rely on Celtic Shipyards, who have a major claim, who have shown diligence and who have defended the limitation action, to take the lead and with their expert determine whether limitation ought to be challenged.
[16]
Given the utility and urgency of inspection, I also granted the short leave necessary to deal with the inspection motion.
[17]
Counsel are to work out a draft order providing for production of the requested documents within five days and inspection of the vessel and of the steering unit within a week following production of the documents, the order to contain appropriate safeguards.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Kelli A. Simmonds/saf
[End of document]