[1]
MacKay, J.
: This application for an interim order in the nature of prohibition was heard on an urgent basis by telephone conference call on August 16, 1993 with counsel for the parties at the court's premises in Toronto and the court sitting in Ottawa.
[2]
After hearing counsel, following a brief recess the application was dismissed for reasons then orally given. These are the written Reasons for that Order, filed in accord with s. 51 of the
Federal Court Act
.
[3]
The application sought
(1) an interim order, pursuant to s.18.1 of the
Federal Court Act
, in the nature of prohibition enjoining the respondent in the Immigration and Refugee Board, Convention Refugee Determination Division, from holding a refugee claim hearing pursuant to s. 69.3(1) of the
Immigration Act
pending the processing of the applicant's application for permanent residence status;
(2) if leave is required pursuant to s. 82.1 of the
Immigration Act
, an order granting leave to apply for an interim prohibition order; and
(3) an order abridging the notice.
[4]
The applicant is a citizen of Ghana who arrived in Canada in April 1988, and on the day of his arrival claimed refugee status. His wife joined him in Canada in June 1990 and in May of the following year she gave birth to their son in Toronto. As a member of the refugee backlog group his claim was considered by a credible basis panel in February 1992 and both members of the panel found there was a credible basis for his refugee claim. Under the Designated Class
Regulations
under the
Immigration Act
he was then permitted to apply for landing and he did make application for permanent residence in March 1992.
[5]
In December 1992 he was convicted of the
Criminal Code
offence of fraud over $1,000, was given a suspended sentence and placed on probation for a period of two years, ordered to make restitution and ordered to provide community service for 100 hours.
[6]
On April 1993 a report was made under the
Immigration Act
confirming the applicant's criminal activities and on April 27 a letter was written to him, though the surname was misspelled and the wrong date of his credible basis determination was included. The letter was from an immigration officer advising that since he is "criminally inadmissible to Canada" his application for permanent residence has been denied and that his claim to refugee status would be referred to a full hearing before the Convention Refugee Determination Division. No mention of this decision concerning his application for permanent resident status is included in the affidavit or other documents filed on behalf of the applicant, but it is included in an affidavit and appended exhibits filed on behalf of the respondent in this application.
[7]
On June 28, 1993 the applicant was summoned to appear at an Immigration Office and was then served that day with a notice to appear at a full refugee hearing on August 17, 1993 at 1:00 p.m. before the Immigration and Refugee Board of the C.R.D.D. On August 12 an application for leave and for judicial review pursuant to s. 18.1 of the
Federal Court Act
was filed to question the decision of the registrar of the Immigration and Refugee Board to serve the notice to appear for a full hearing of his convention refugee claim. That application also seeks an extension of time to file that application and supporting documents since the applicant had sought legal aid to be represented in this matter, final determination of which was still outstanding. On that same day, August 12, with the application for leave and for judicial review, an affidavit of the applicant was filed together with a notice of motion for the interim order of prohibition described as an order to be "pending the processing of his application for permanent residence status". Arrangements were then made by the court for the application for an interim order to be heard on short notice on Monday, August 16, 1993, and that day an affidavit of Sally Thomas with attached exhibits and a memorandum of points to be argued was filed and received by the court in Ottawa by fax before the hearing.
[8]
After hearing counsel for the parties and following a brief recess, I dismissed the application for the following reasons.
1. The application for leave pursuant to s. 82.1 of the
Immigration Act
for this matter to be heard and for abridging the time for notice of the hearing is allowed and the matter was heard.
2. The application for an order of prohibition pending disposition of the applicant's application for permanent residence is dismissed. That issue is moot for the evidence before the court is that the applicant was advised in writing in April 1993 that his application for permanent residence was refused, and that letter informed him of the reason for that decision. I note that that decision is not questioned by the motion before the court or in the application for leave and for judicial review filed at the same time.
3. In argument counsel for the applicant implied an oral motion to amend the motion for relief, in order to seek an interim order of prohibition precluding the hearing arranged by the C.R.D.D. scheduled for August 17, 1993, pending consideration by the court of the applicant's application for leave and for judicial review, and I allowed such amendment in order to consider the application for an interim order of prohibition on its merits. After consideration, the motion as so amended is dismissed.
[9]
The last decision is made because the court is not satisfied that the necessary basis for a stay is established by the applicant. That basis requires the court be satisfied that there are serious or arguable issues raised by the applicant, that the applicant establish that he will suffer irreparable harm if the relief sought is not granted and that the balance of convenience favours the granting of the relief sought (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.)).
[10]
Counsel differ on whether issues raised by the application for leave and for judicial review are serious. Obviously that matter is arguable and I am not prepared to make a final determination of that matter on the basis of brief oral argument heard by telephone. Nevertheless, since the matter is arguable I am prepared to assume, for purposes of considering this amended application for an interim order of prohibition, that serious issues are raised by the applicant.
[11]
I am not, however, persuaded that the applicant establishes irreparable harm will befall him if the relief sought is not granted, as the jurisprudence requires. The harm of concern to the applicant, it seems clear to me, at this stage is entirely speculative. On the argument before me the harm feared is based on a series of possibilities: if the hearing by the C.R.D.D. is held, and if the applicant should be found not to be a Convention refugee, a possibility said to be likely in statistics (not here in evidence and not relevant) concerning other recent decisions of the C.R.D.D. concerning refugee claimants from Ghana, and if a removal order is made requiring the removal of the applicant from Canada to his native Ghana, a country where he fears his life may be in danger, then the applicant would suffer irreparable harm.
[12]
Irreparable harm must be more than a series of possibilities. The jurisprudence is clear that the court must be satisfied that it will occur if the relief sought is not granted. ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 129 (F.C.A.) per Heald, J.A., at p. 135.) I am not satisfied at this stage that such case is established. Thus, I find that there is not irreparable harm on the basis of the evidence and argument before me.
[13]
In these circumstances, bearing in mind the public interest in support of the discharge of the respondent's responsibilities, including these of the C.R.D.D., under the
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Man.R.(2d) 241). The balance of convenience clearly favours the respondent.
[14]
The court will not intervene to stay the discharge of statutory responsibilities, even if serious issues are raised in proceedings before the court about the exercise of those responsibilities, unless the claimant, for relief clearly establishes that he will suffer irreparable harm if an order, even an interim order, to stay the discharge of those responsibilities, is not made.
[15]
This court is not satisfied on the evidence before it that the applicant will suffer irreparable harm if the relief sought if not granted. Thus the application as amended, to seek relief pending consideration of the applicant's application for leave and for judicial review, is dismissed.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Eric B. Appleby/dlr
[End of document]