[1]
Pinard, J.
: The appellant appeals, by way of a trial de novo, a decision of the Citizenship Judge which denied her application for citizenship because she had not fulfilled the residence requirement of the
Citizenship Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-29 (the "
Act
"). Section 5(1)(c) of that
Act
states:
"5(1) The Minister shall grant citizenship to any person who ...
(c) has been lawfully admitted to Canada for permanent residence, has not ceased since such admission to be a permanent resident pursuant to section 24 of the
Immigration Act
, and
has, within the four years immediately preceding the date of his application, accumulated at least three years of residence in Canada
..." (emphasis added)
[2]
The appellant needed to accumulate 1,095 days of residence in Canada to meet the
Act's
residence requirement. In fact, the respondent was physically present within Canada for a total of only 555 days during the four-year period preceding her application for citizenship, which is dated January 13, 1992. Moreover, it was only on November 1, 1990 that the appellant established a residence and maintained a pied-à-terre in Canada for the first time, in a dwelling which she was renting for herself and her family.
[3]
Although the jurisprudence which is now firmly entrenched does not require physical presence in Canada for the entire 1,095 days, a mere intent to return to this country is not sufficient to establish the requisite residence requirement. The circumstances of this particular case do not allow me to conclude that the appellant regularly, normally or customarily lived in Canada prior to November 1, 1990. The evidence clearly shows the appellant could not have centralized her mode of existence in Canada before that specific time, which is well less than three years before the date of her application for Canadian citizenship (see
Koo, Re
(1992), 59 F.T.R. 27 (F.C.T.D.)).
[4]
I find, therefore, that the appellant does not meet the residence requirement of the
Act
. Consequently, the appeal will be dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/aga
[End of document]