[1]
Dubé, J.
[Translation]: This is a claim for damages by the plaintiff as a consequence of the alleged failure of the defendant's servants to award him a position as an economist with the Department of Transport.
1-Facts
[2]
The plaintiff ("Mr. Kibale"), a black Canadian born in Marseilles, France of a Martiniquais mother and a Belgo-Zairian father, came to Canada in 1969. In 1971 he married a Canadian, Claire Soucy. He obtained a master's degree in economics from the University of Brussels and did the course work, but not the thesis, for a doctorate in economics at Laval University in Quebec. Previously, he had obtained a certificate in political and sociological science from the University of Liége, Belgium, and had studied medicine at the University of Paris for two years.
[3]
In May 1981, the Public Service Commission of Canada ("the Commission") advertised a public competition (81-NCRSC-TC 10) in the newspapers to fill position No. T-EX-5171, a Strategic Economist-Analyst (ES 04) in the Strategic Analysis Branch of Transport Canada. As there were two other ES 04 positions to be filled in another Transport Department branch, namely Systems Planning, it was decided to use the same pool of candidates to fill the three vacancies. Such an overlapping procedure is known as "piggy-backing". I will analyze this procedure in the course of my judgment.
[4]
After a preliminary screening of the candidates' curricula vitae, 10 of them met the basic requirements for the positions and were called to an interview before a selection board. Mr. Kibale went for an interview on July 15, 1981. It was then that he learned that the interview was for the three vacant positions, not exclusively for the position advertised in the newspapers for which he had applied.
[5]
According to the documentation, three persons were to be on the board: Mr. Robert Bisaillon, chief, personnel unit, Dr. Jean Boulakia, under whose orders the successful candidate would work in the Strategic Analysis Branch, and Mr. John Sylvester, who held a parallel position in Systems Planning. Further, Mr. Bisaillon took part only in the first of the interviews, that dated July 10, 1991, and did not take part in or attend the other interviews scheduled in connection with the competition, including that of Mr. Kibale five days later.
[6]
As a result of these interviews, Mr. Kibale received the best results for position T-EX-5171 ("the analyst's position"), with a grade of 80 per cent awarded by Dr. Boulakia. He also received the highest grade awarded by Mr. Sylvester, 71.5 per cent. It is worth noting that Mr. Sylvester selected the candidates based on the three vacant positions and decided that five of the candidates were qualified, while Dr. Boulakia selected only on the basis of the analyst's position and found that only two candidates were qualified.
[7]
It was agreed between the two men that, as the one who initiated the staffing process, Dr. Boulakia could choose the candidate with the best grade after the interviews: Mr. Sylvester would select the two next best candidates he found qualified for positions T-EX-5163 ("the two managerial positions"). Mr. Sylvester therefore made his two choices, while Dr. Boulakia submitted his two candidates, Mr. Kibale and a Mr. Datta, to his immediate superior, Dr. Zizzi Haritos. Following his interview with Dr. Haritos on July 28, 1981, Mr. Kibale was told by telephone on August 14, 1981 that Dr. Haritos had decided that neither of the two candidates was qualified for the analyst's position.
[8]
When he received this bad news, Mr. Kibale at once took steps to correct the situation. The same day he telephoned Dr. Haritos' superior, Mr. Nick Mulder, as well as Mr. Goeff Seaborn, Special Assistant to the Minister of Transport, to file a complaint and to request an inquiry on grounds of discrimination. On September 25, 1981, Mr. Bisaillon told Mr. Kibale that his complaint to Transport Canada had been dismissed.
[9]
Mr. Kibale, not satisfied with the turn of events, began proceedings in the Federal Court. His application for mandamus asking that Transport Canada appoint him to the analyst's position was dismissed by Marceau, J., then member of the Trial Division, on the following ground:
"As the 'duty' mentioned in the application never existed as such and none of the respondents failed to perform any legal obligation connected with his situation or function in not attempting to fill or have filled the position associated with competition 81-NCRSO-TC-10 (47) in which the applicant participated, the court clearly cannot allow this application and make the order requested."
[10]
Mr. Kibale appealed this decision. He eventually discontinued his appeal and later sought to return to it with an application to reopen the case. This application was also dismissed as was an application for leave to appeal to the Supreme Court of Canada.
[11]
In February 1982, Mr. Kibale submitted a discrimination complaint to the Anti-Discrimination Branch of the Commission. Mr. Ronald D. O'Connell, Deputy Director of that Branch, conducted an investigation into the matter and prepared a report concluding that the discrimination complaint was valid. On the other hand, Mr. L.R. Huneault, Assistant Deputy Minister at Transport Canada responsible for administering the Department's personnel unit, told Mr. O'Connell that though the staffing process adopted in the competition in question was "unique" and that "the facts pertaining to this particular staffing process were not well documented or monitored", he did not find that Mr. Kibale was a victim of discrimination. Ultimately, a higher level in the Commission, after reviewing the O'Connell report, decided in November 1983 that the latter's conclusion was wrong.
[12]
Mr. Kibale then went to the Human Rights Commission, still arguing discrimination. After over 11 days' hearing, a tribunal presided over by Mr. Stanley Hartt on September 5, 1985, dismissed the applicant's complaint on the ground that he had not proven discrimination. However, Mr. Hartt observed in his decision that the complainant had established "a series of irregular practices in the hiring process used in his case". In the course of his reasons he described the competition in question as "irremediably irregular".
[13]
Mr. Kibale appealed this decision to a Review Tribunal, which on January 27, 1987 affirmed Mr. Hartt's decision. The appeal tribunal took the same view as Mr. Hartt regarding the staffing process but nevertheless concluded that "the human rights tribunal has no power to control and supervise the operation of the staffing process".
[14]
Accordingly, on October 6, 1988 the plaintiff initiated the action at bar for damages in the Federal Court, Trial Division. The defendant responded on November 3, 1988 by filing an application to strike on the ground that the action was prescribed. This application was allowed on December 2, 1988 by Denault, J., who dismissed the plaintiff's action as being brought more than six years after the cause of action arose. [See 26 F.T.R. 307]
[15]
On November 28, 1990 the Federal Court of Appeal allowed Mr. Kibale's appeal on the ground that the application to strike was premature, since prescription does not extinguish the right of action, it merely gives the defendant a procedural means of defence: a plaintiff can await the filing of the defence and plead facts in response indicating that his action is not belated. [See 123 N.R. 153]
2-Prescription
[16]
In the case at bar the defendant pleaded prescription in her defence, in particular in paragraph 32 which reads as follows:
"32. The plaintiff's action is prescribed in accordance with the prescription specified in s. 39 of the
Federal Court Act
, s. 32 of the
Crown Liability Act
and s. 45(1)(g) of the Ontario
Limitations Act
."
[17]
It was in fact the six year prescription of this Ontario statute that Denault, J., had applied in his judgment striking out the action. This aspect of his decision was not questioned by the Federal Court of Appeal. On the other hand, counsel for the defendant submitted in his argument (without prior notice and without amending his defence) that this cause of action should be governed not by the Ontario statute but by Quebec law, as the alleged damage occurred in Quebec.
[18]
It should be noted that under the provisions of arts. 2261 and 2262 of the
Civil Code of Lower Canada
a short prescription of two years, or even one, would apply to the case at bar. According to the defendant's argument, the plaintiff's cause of action arose in Montreal, Province of Quebec: that is where the plaintiff was living when the events took place and it is in that city that he learned from a telephone conversation, and then formally by a letter received in Montreal, that his candidacy had not been successful.
[19]
Counsel for the defendant relied first on
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 1 N.R. 122, a judgment of the Supreme Court of Canada. The electrician Moran was fatally injured in Saskatchewan while removing a spent light bulb manufactured by the respondent company, resident in Ontario. The court held that the forum in which the plaintiff suffered the damage was entitled to exercise judicial jurisdiction over the Ontario defendant and that the Saskatchewan court therefore had the power to entertain the action in question.
[20]
Counsel further relied on
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , a decision of the Ontario High Court of Justice. In that case the event giving rise to damages for breach of contract was a telephone call from outside of Ontario. A lower court concluded that the Ontario court lacked jurisdiction. This decision was reversed on appeal and the court held that, as the fault was committed in Ontario and the damage suffered in Ontario, the geographic source of the incitement by telephone was of no consequence.
[21]
There is no basis for accepting these arguments by the defendant. If there was fault by the defendant's servants in the case at bar, that fault was committed in Ottawa, where the events giving rise to the action occurred and where all persons involved were present. The mere fact that the decision was communicated from Ottawa to Montreal, where Mr. Kibale was living at the time, and that he initiated his first complaints from Montreal, in my opinion has no bearing whatever.
[22]
Accordingly, it is the Ontario prescription which must be applied in the case at bar. Section 45(1)(g) of the Ontario
Limitations Act
, R.S.O. 1980, c. 240, provides that an action for damages is prescribed "within six years after the cause of action arose". The first question to be asked, therefore, is when the cause of action arose for the purposes of prescription. It is now established following the Supreme Court's judgment in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  N.S.R.(2d) 109; 186 A.P.R. 109; 42 R.P.R. 161 that a cause of action arises when the material facts on which it is based have been discovered by the plaintiff or ought to have been discovered if he had exercised reasonable diligence.
[23]
The cause of action so far as the analyst's position is concerned clearly arose when Mr. Kibale was told in August 1981 that he had not been found qualified by Dr. Haritos, whereas he definitely knew at that time that he had received the highest grade of 80 per cent awarded by Dr. Boulakia. He in fact immediately took steps to obtain justice, namely on August 14, 1981. This cause of action was therefore prescribed six years later, in the summer of 1987, whereas his first statement of claim in the Federal Court was not filed until October 6, 1988.
[24]
The plaintiff's action with respect to the analyst's position must therefore be dismissed.
[25]
On the other hand, the cause of action regarding the two managerial positions, if there was one, presents a much more difficult problem. I must first determine at what point the material facts on which this cause of action is based were discovered by Mr. Kibale, or ought to have been discovered if he had exercised reasonable diligence.
[26]
In this connection, Mr. Kibale submitted that though he was aware at the July 1981 interview that the selection process was for the three vacant positions, he did not know how the "piggy-back" process operated. He insisted that it was not until the hearings held before the human rights tribunal in 1985 that he learned he had obtained the highest grade from Mr. Sylvester.
[27]
In his submission, that is the time at which he first learned of a memorandum dated August 19, 1981 from Mr. John Sylvester to the responsible staffing officer, Ms. Lise Dagenais, and entered in evidence by counsel for the Crown at the hearing before the tribunal. That memorandum indicated in paragraph 5 that Mr. Kibale had had a slight edge of 1½ per cent over the candidate Morris who was eventually selected by Mr. Sylvester. Accompanying this memorandum, a detailed breakdown of the grades awarded by Mr. Sylvester to each of the 10 candidates based on 11 criteria indicates that Mr. Kibale obtained the best grade, that of 71.5 per cent. We will return to this below.
[28]
Mr. Kibale's argument is that Mr. Sylvester always gave him to understand that he had not found him qualified for the two managerial positions. The factor which considerably complicates the situation is that Mr. Sylvester is now dead.
[29]
Of course, Mr. Kibale's ignorance of his possible entitlement to the two managerial positions is a significant fact. The other question which inevitably arises from this is whether this material fact ought to have been discovered by Mr. Kibale if he had exercised reasonable diligence. I do not think it would have been. If his own testimony is to be believed, he knew Mr. Sylvester well, he had even by chance become his neighbour in Ottawa and he had confidence in him.
[30]
At the time, Mr. Kibale was chiefly interested in the analyst's position and he directed all his efforts at obtaining justice towards that position. It should be borne in mind that his first complaints to Transport Canada and the Commission's Anti-Discrimination Branch, as well as his application for mandamus, concerned only the analyst's position. It was not until the hearing before the human rights tribunal that he sought to amend his complaint to include the two managerial positions and was finally given leave to do so by Mr. Hartt. At that time Mr. Kibale had not yet brought the action at bar for damages and there was no reason to suspect that he was already preparing a defence against the prescription.
[31]
It therefore follows that Mr. Kibale's cause of action in respect of the two managerial positions is not prescribed.
3-Cause Of Action
[32]
The action at bar is not based on discrimination but on the
Crown Liability Act
, R.S.C. 1970, c. C-38, and in particular on the provisions of s. 3(1)(a) of that
Act
. That section provides that the Crown is liable in respect of a tort committed by a servant of the Crown in the course of his duties.
[33]
For his action holding the defendant liable to stand, Mr. Kibale must show that the appointments in question, namely to one of the two managerial positions, were denied to him because of wrongful acts committed by servants of the defendant acting in the court of their duties. If they were at fault, that fault must have been committed contrary to the
Public Service Employment Act
, R.S.C. 1970, c. P-32 ("the
Act
") and the
Regulations
adopted pursuant to that
Act
. The fundamental question that arises is whether or not the merit principle laid down in s. 10 of the
Act
was respected. If it was not, did the failure to comply with that section constitute a fault?
4-Merit Principle
[34]
The merit principle in the Public Service has been recognized and accepted by the courts.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , cited in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , T-1427-89, T-1201-90, January 30, 1992;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . Section 10 of the
Act
lays down the basic rule applicable to the Commission's appointments and selection standards:
"10.
Appointments to or from within the Public Service shall be based on selection according to merit
, as determined by the Commission, and shall be made by the Commission, at the request of the deputy head concerned, by competition or by such other process of personnel selection designed to establish the merit of candidates as the Commission considers is in the best interests of the Public Service." (My emphasis)
[35]
Section 12(1) of the
Act
provides that the Commission may, in determining the basis of assessment of merit, prescribe selection standards. Section 17 provides that the Commission shall select from among the qualified candidates those with the highest ranking and place their names on one or more eligible lists. Section 18 specifies that when an appointment under the
Act
is to be made to a position by competition, the appointment shall be made from an eligible list established for that position. Finally, s. 21 of the
Regulations
states that the person with the highest rank on an eligible list duly established for a given position shall be appointed to the position in question.
[36]
As we have already seen, the process used in the case at bar was not the usual competition for a single position. Those responsible chose a procedure known as "piggy-backing". This procedure is not covered by the
Act
, the
Regulations
or the Commission's personnel staffing manual.
[37]
According to the testimony of Ms. Alison Murdoch, a governmental expert on staffing, when vacant positions in various divisions come within the same occupational group, are at the same level and call for identical basic requirements, a single competition may be used to prepare one or more eligible lists to fill these positions which are not identical but similar. If these criteria are met, those responsible may set up a single selection board with a representative from each division concerned to select candidates in accordance with the needs of their own vacant position or positions.
[38]
In other words, if it appears after the initial screening on the basis of curricula vitae that a number of candidates meet the basic requirements for different but similar positions, the "piggy-back" process may effectively be used to fill these positions if it is appropriately conducted.
[39]
In my opinion, the evidence clearly showed that in the case at bar the use of the "piggy-back" procedure was not appropriate and the procedure was misused along the way. I must therefore note certain of the errors which in my view vitiated the selection process.
[40]
1. The "piggy-back" formula was not appropriate in the circumstances as the basic requirements of the analyst's position and those of the two managerial positions were not identical, as can be seen just from reading the statements of qualifications for the positions. The position originally sought by Mr. Kibale was of a purely analytic nature, described as a "strategic economist-analyst" in the advertisement published in the newspapers. The statement of qualifications gives him the duties of "Analyst, Strategic Analysis" in the "Strategic Policy Branch". The description of duties summarizes the duties of the position in part as follows:
"Under the direction of the Chief, Strategic Analysis Division conducts analytical and research projects to provide evaluations and recommendations concerning the extent to which policy principles are met by current federal transportation policies and programs, on proposals made by the administrations and Transport Canada agencies to assess their adherence to the principles outlined in the
National Transportation Act
and to assess the socio-economic impact on the transportation industry and Canadian economy in general ..."
[41]
On the other hand, the two positions Mr. Sylvester wished to fill were in the "Intermodal Passenger Branch" of the "Systems Planning" division. They involved an active role in developing transport policies and programs. Position T-EX-5163 was described as "Project Officer, Intermodal Studies" and position T-EX-5183 as "Analyst, Intermodal Passenger". The following extract from the description of duties makes the managerial function of this position quite clear:
"Under the general direction of the Project Director, Intermodal Passenger Branch, initiates, plans, organizes, manages and executes major socio-economic or behavioural science projects and studies, to aid in the development of programs and policies designed to increase the adequacy, efficiency and effectiveness of passenger transportation systems and networks throughout Canada; ..."
[42]
A review of the documents describing the duties relating to the positions in greater detail also confirms the difference between them.
[43]
What this means is that Mr. Sylvester was seeking two economists who could be directly involved in planning and evaluating transport systems, while Mr. Boulakia was looking for an economist who could make theoretical analyses of and research into the relations between the principal policies and transport policies already in place or contemplated for the future.
[44]
2. Before leaving on vacation the staffing officer responsible, Ms. Lise Dagenais, asked her superior Mr. Robert Bisaillon, then head of the services unit, to supervise the competition in her absence. Mr. Bisaillon was only present at the first interview. In light of the developments which occurred during the process, it can now be seen that closer control was necessary for the competition to be properly conducted. In particular, the officer should have ensured that Dr. Boulakia and Mr. Sylvester understood their respective roles and knew how to proceed in grading and qualifying candidates in a "piggy-back" competition.
[45]
3. Three names appeared on the list of members of the selection board: Messrs. Bisaillon and Sylvester and Dr. Boulakia. However, as mentioned, Mr. Bisaillon only attended the first of the 10 interviews. However, a fourth member, who was not on the board list, namely Dr. Haritos, participated in the final decision on the analyst's position. Whereas all candidates were asked to respond to the same questionnaire and to appear at the same interview (except the first) before Mr. Sylvester and Dr. Boulakia, only the two candidates qualified by Dr. Boulakia were called to another interview on July 28, 1981 with Dr. Haritos, Dr. Boulakia's superior. The selection system was therefore misused, since all the candidates were not assessed by the same members of the board.
[46]
4. Further, according to his testimony Dr. Boulakia believed that his selection of the candidates qualified for the analyst's position was final, like that of his colleague Mr. Sylvester for the managerial positions: he only introduced his two candidates to his superior officer out of courtesy. Dr. Haritos maintained this was not so. He testified that Dr. Boulakia knew he had the final decision. In any case, as the action respecting the analyst's position is prescribed, this evidence is only relevant insofar as it forms part of the confused sequence of events surrounding the piggy-back competition in question.
[47]
5. Dr. Boulakia accordingly introduced his qualified candidates to Dr. Haritos. After interviewing Messrs. Kibale and Datta, Dr. Haritos decided on his own that neither one was qualified to fill the analyst's position.
[48]
6. Mr. Sylvester, for his part, chose the two candidates who he thought were best qualified for the two managerial positions. On July 27, 1981 he sent Ms. Dagenais a report indicating Mr. Morris as his first choice for the T-EX-5163 position and Mr. Schubert for the T-EX-5183 position. Further, this report informed Ms. Dagenais that five of the candidates were qualified, as follows:
"5 Passed. Morris, Schubert, Bartucci, Datta,
Kibale (for John Boulakia's position)
" (My emphasis)
[49]
7. Three weeks later, on August 19, 1981, after Dr. Haritos' decision that Mr. Kibale was not qualified and would not be appointed to the analyst's position, Mr. Sylvester at Ms. Dagenais' request prepared a second more detailed memorandum regarding the procedure in and results of the competition. This document was accompanied by the questionnaires used in the competition and by a detailed breakdown indicating the grades given to each of the 10 candidates. This was the memorandum filed with the Human Rights Commission to which I referred earlier. As mentioned, the breakdown indicated that Mr. Kibale had received the best grade, namely 71.5 per cent. On the other hand, Mr. Sylvester explained in the following two paragraphs why he did not consider Mr. Kibale was qualified for his two positions:
"5. You will note that Kibale had a slight edge (1½ mark) over Morris. I judged Kibale to be stronger academically in Economics and he exhibited policy advisory experience, but my judgment [sic] these were not strong requirements for DGST [systems] analysis work I was looking for.
"6. I judged Morris, Schubert and Bartucci to be more qualified than Kibale for systems analysis because of their related experience in the federal government, private industry (e.g. CP), their work in the collection and correlation of multimodal data and varied multimodal experience."
[50]
On August 24, 1981, Ms. Dagenais drew up eligibility lists for the two managerial positions from the names recommended by Mr. Sylvester. The result is as we already know: Mr. Sylvester filled his two positions, Dr. Haritos selected no one from the competition and Mr. Kibale received no appointment.
[51]
If the analyst's position was at issue I would be inclined to conclude that the merit principle was not observed, that an eligibility list should have been drawn up for that position and that Mr. Kibale's name should have been placed first on that list. In my opinion, the failure of the Crown's servants to conduct the staffing process properly was a tort against Mr. Kibale. Unfortunately for him his cause of action in respect of that position is prescribed.
[52]
The same conclusion does not immediately follow for the two managerial positions. It must be borne in mind at the outset that Mr. Kibale was seeking the analyst's position: the possibility of applying for the other two positions only arose indirectly as a result of the "piggy-back" process.
[53]
It is clear that Mr. Sylvester was looking for two managerial economists and the reason he gave Mr. Kibale the highest grade was that he found his academic qualifications to be excellent and regarded him as having the talents sought by Dr. Boulakia. In view of the initial agreement between the two men that Dr. Boulakia had the first choice, Mr. Sylvester was very pleased to see Mr. Kibale going to Dr. Boulakia's unit, while he himself selected the other two economists with the necessary administrative experience in his division.
[54]
It thus follows that even if the aforementioned irregularities were torts which may have cost Mr. Kibale the analyst's position he desired, they did not cause him to lose the two managerial positions for which he was not qualified on merit. In other words, if there had been no "piggy-back" and Mr. Sylvester had held an independent competition for the two managerial positions, he would not have selected Mr. Kibale.
[55]
It must be remembered that Mr. Sylvester had complete authority to select the candidates in his division and that this authority included that of giving Ms. Dagenais the names of the candidates he felt were qualified to be placed on the eligible lists drawn up for these positions.
[56]
Though Mr. Sylvester has died, and I therefore did not have an opportunity of hearing him testify, there is abundant evidence to indicate that at the time of the interviews Mr. Sylvester believed that Dr. Boulakia had a final power of selection for the analyst's position. In a statement written on April 16, 1982 while the investigation conducted by Mr. O'Connell was underway, and filed with the human rights tribunal in March 1985 as well as with this court, Mr. Sylvester said the following:
"... I was a duly appointed member of the selection board ... conducted for the purpose of selecting candidates in accordance with the
Public Service Employment Act
. The other member of the selection board Jean Boulakia and I both rated candidates against the appropriate selection standards and found Mr. G. Kibale best qualified for position T-EX-5171 ...
In this exercise I truly believe that our selection decision was final and not subject to change by another person.
" (My emphasis)
[57]
A memorandum dated August 18, 1982, included by Mr. O'Connell in the record of his inquiry, regarding a telephone conversation held with Dr. Boulakia confirms that Mr. Sylvester had expressed great surprise when he learned that the decision-making authority for the analyst's position belonged to Dr. Haritos. Mr. O'Connell wrote:
"Boulakia says he thinks he mentioned his arrangement after the interviews ... but he remembers Sylvester was very surprised and said he wouldn't have gone through the interviews if he had known of the arrangement beforehand. This is congruent with Sylvester's statements ..."
[58]
Further, the human rights tribunal acknowledged that Mr. Sylvester did not expect Dr. Haritos not to hire Mr. Kibale. The presiding officer described the consequences of this decision by Dr. Haritos as follows:
"... Mr. Sylvester felt obliged to offer him one of the two positions available in his section instead of offering them to his preferred candidates ... He was completely frustrated by the trap into which he had fallen ... He would never have qualified Mr. Kibale for the positions available in his section. In actual fact, he would not have done it if the questions had really been intended to exclude theoretical economists or strategic analysts and indicate the candidates with the necessary skills in program management."
[59]
These comments seem to me to adequately indicate the relevant course of events. In fact, in his testimony in this court Dr. Boulakia stated that Mr. Sylvester had told him he was not interested in a theoretician but in a manager.
[60]
Further, even if Ms. Dagenais had gone beyond Mr. Sylvester's wishes and put Mr. Kibale's name on the eligible lists prepared for the two managerial positions so as to meet a technical requirement, Mr. Kibale's appointment to one of those positions was not thereby guaranteed.
[61]
Section 6(2) of the
Act
provides that where the Commission is of the opinion that a person who is about to be appointed to a position does not have the qualifications necessary to perform the duties of the position, it must notwithstanding any provision of the
Act
direct that the appointment not be made. In such a case, the Commission must give the person in question an opportunity to defend himself or herself, either orally or in writing in the Commission's discretion (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.)).
[62]
So far as the practice followed in the Public Service is concerned, the testimony of Ms. Alison Murdoch was that a staffing officer may not appoint a candidate over the objections of the manager of the unit in question. According to the rules of shared accountability on staffing in the Public Service, while the staffing officer is responsible for conducting the selection process it is the manager, the expert in his field, who is responsible for identifying the qualities required and selecting the person in accordance with those qualities. In the present case, Mr. Sylvester was not only the responsible manager but, unlike Dr. Haritos, was also a duly appointed member of the selection board.
[63]
In his argument Mr. Kibale relied on a judgment of the Supreme Court of Canada, <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> [supra], dealing with determining a candidate's merit under the provisions of s. 10 of the
Act
. It appears from that case that a candidate has the right to have his name entered on the eligible list for a position if he can establish that he qualifies for such an appointment "on merit".
[64]
It follows from my reasons that in my opinion Mr. Kibale was not qualified "on merit" for an appointment to one of the managerial positions. The mere fact that Mr. Sylvester gave him the best grade in a "piggy-back" process vitiated by error does not in the circumstances mean that Mr. Sylvester regarded him as best qualified to fill one of the positions in question.
[65]
However, much sympathy one may feel for this plaintiff who has fought alone, without the aid of counsel, for 10 years, I clearly cannot find in his favour. His action concerning the analyst's position he was seeking is prescribed and the evidence is that the merit principle was observed with respect to the other two positions.
[66]
The plaintiff's action is accordingly dismissed, but in view of the special and unusual circumstances of this case, each party will pay its own costs.
Action dismissed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/sms