[1]
Dubé, J.
: This application is for an order pursuant to s. 18.1 of the
Federal Court Act
to declare unlawful or invalid the decision of Susan Zerr, Supervisor of the Central Removals Unit of Canada Employment and Immigration Commission to remove the applicant from Canada on March 12, 1992, to Mexico.
[2]
The main ground for the application is that the Supervisor acted contrary to s. 50(1) of the
Immigration Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2, in having the applicant removed from Canada when she knew that the applicant was scheduled to appear in the Provincial Court of British Columbia at Vancouver, pursuant to an undertaking on his part to do so, and a subsequent order of the British Columbia Court to attend the hearing in question.
[3]
The applicant was removed to Mexico on March 12, 1992, pursuant to a deportation order issued on July 26, 1991. At the time of his removal, he was the subject to said undertaking and order which required him to return to the Provincial Court of British Columbia on March 13, 1992, in relation to a charge that he did unlawfully traffic cocaine contrary to the provisions of the
Narcotic Control Act
. The applicant returned to Canada of his own volition on April 28, 1992. He was arrested on April 30, 1992, by Immigration Officials for an inquiry under s. 103(2) of the
Immigration Act
on the basis that there were reasonable and probable grounds to believe that he is a person in Canada other than a Canadian citizen or permanent resident who is described in paragraph 27(2)(h) of the
Act
, that is, a person who came into Canada contrary to s. 55 of the
Act
. The applicant was subsequently released from custody in relation to both the outstanding immigration inquiry and the outstanding criminal charge.
[4]
The parties are agreed that on March 10, 1992, the applicant's solicitor and a removals officer in Vancouver had a conversation regarding the applicant. The applicant's lawyer claims that the officer told him that the planned removal would not be carried out unless the Department of Justice dropped the outstanding charges. However, the officer does not recall such a statement. In any event, subsequent to this conversation, counsel spoke with Susan Zerr, the Supervisor, who advised him by facsimile transmission on March 11, 1992, that the applicant would be put on a flight to Mexico the following day.
[5]
Subsection 50(1) of the
Act
reads as follows:
"50(1) A removal order shall not be executed where
(a) the execution of the order would directly result in a contravention of any other order made by any judicial body or officer in Canada; or
(b) the presence in Canada of the person against whom the order was made is required in any criminal proceedings and the Minister stays the execution of the order pending the completion of those proceedings."
[6]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), the Associate Chief Justice prohibited the execution of the deportation order against the applicant so long as the applicant continued to be bound by the provisions of a judicial interim release order in similar circumstances. The respondent does not challenge the application of the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> decision to this case and did not oppose the application for leave in this proceeding. In fact, the respondent agrees that the applicant's situation appears to be identical to that which arose in the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case. Thus, the sole outstanding issue on this application for judicial review is remedy.
[7]
The applicant seeks a prohibition or at least a declaration under para. 18.1(3)(b) of the
Federal Court Act
to the effect that the decision under attack is invalid or unlawful. The respondent concedes that on the authority of the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> decision, the court could, in its discretion, issue such a declaration. However, he argues that it ought not to do so, on the ground that a declaration will not normally be granted when the dispute is over and has become academic. He relies for that proposition on a decision of the  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . The respondent further submits that in determining whether to exercise its discretion the court should have regard to the principle that a declaratory judgment will not be rendered where it will serve little or no purpose or would be contrary to public policy (see
Terrasses Zarolega Inc., Zappia, Robinson, Lepine and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 106 of 1 S.C.R., and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), p. 41.
[8]
The respondent argues that the applicant negotiated his way back into Canada of his own volition and without the intervention of the Minister: he is not, therefore, a person who is within the category of persons who have the right to come into Canada or to remain therein as set out in s. 4 of the
Act
. An inquiry has been convened in relation to the allegation that the applicant is a person who is described in para. 27(2)(h) of the
Act
, that is, a person who came into Canada contrary to s. 55 of the
Act
. In the respondent's view, the granting of a declaration might be tantamount to sanctioning the applicant's decision to return to Canada without first having ensured that he had a lawful right to do so (see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Fed. C.A.) pp. 47 and 52).
[9]
I cannot accept these propositions. The dispute is not over and the declaration to which the applicant is entitled may have a practical effect. It is not a moot question. Since the respondent now concedes that the removal was unlawful, a court declaration to that effect would be a factor to be considered at the immigration inquiry held to decide whether or not he reentered Canada unlawfully. Surely, the fact that he ought not to have been deported in the first place is a matter to be considered. Furthermore, there is no written undertaking on the part of the Minister that the applicant will not be removed again and thus prevented from attending the criminal hearing contrary to the Provincial Court order and contrary to s. 50(1) of the
Act
and the jurisprudence in the matter. Of course, the court cannot, at this stage, issue a prohibition since there is no fresh removal order issued against the applicant, but the declaration sought in this motion is the proper remedy.
[10]
Consequently, the decision of the Supervisor of the Central Removals Unit of the Canada Employment and Immigration Commission to remove the applicant from Canada to Mexico on March 12, 1992, is hereby declared unlawful.
Application granted.
Editor: Angela E. McKay/sg
[End of document]