[1]
MacKay, J.
: By application filed August 22, 1990, Brewster Mountain Pack Trains Ltd. ("Brewster") seeks various forms of discretionary relief provided under then s. 18 of the
Federal Court Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7 (as that section read prior to its amendment effective February 1, 1992).
[2]
The relief sought concerns the decision of the respondent Minister of the Environment in 1989 not to issue or reinstate a Resident Outfitter's License ("R.O.L."), a form of license which Brewster had held on an annual basis over many years. When this matter was heard counsel for the applicant indicated that the request for two particular forms of relief was abandoned, withdrawing a claim to an order requiring the respondent to direct the issue or reinstatement to the applicant of an R.O.L., and withdrawing a claim to a declaration. One other claim set out in the motion, a claim to mandamus was modified to omit reference to directing approval by the Park Superintendent of the application for a license. This left for consideration of the court, in addition to a claim for costs on a solicitor and client basis, claims to relief for
"1. an order in the nature of certiorari quashing and setting aside a decision of the respondent Minister of the Environment affirming the decision of the Superintendent of Banff National Park not to issue or reinstate the R.O.L. of the applicant;
"2. an order in the nature of certiorari quashing the Banff National Park Management Plan; and
"3. an order in the nature of mandamus requiring the respondent Minister to direct the Superintendent of the park to consider the applicant's application for renewal of its R.O.L."
[3]
Decisions concerning the issue or reissue of an R.O.L. for the applicant were made in the context of the development of a plan for Banff National Park (the "Park"), among other mountain national parks, which appears to have resulted in changes in arrangements for licensing of activities authorized in the Park, or so it is said. At the time of the decision concerning the license for Brewster the plan had been approved by the Minister and subsequently, in December 1989 the plan was tabled in the House of Commons by him.
[4]
Brewster, a company incorporated pursuant to the laws of Alberta, has carried on business for more than 30 years under an R.O.L. issued annually until and including the year 1988 under the
National Parks Business Regulations
, made pursuant to the
National Parks Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. N-14, as amended. The applicant, established on the basis of a Brewster family enterprise with a long history as an outfitter for trail rides and camping with horses in Banff National Park, has carried on that same business. Bud Brewster, current President of the applicant, by affidavit states that his family, in the course of operating its pack train business over the years, established the majority of permanent pack train campsites now in use in the Park.
[5]
From 1989 on Brewster has continued operations as an outfitter, in the Park, under another form of business license but it is concerned that failure of Parks Canada to recognize its status as a resident outfitter in the Park may adversely affect its operations. The respondent's view is that under the business license issued to it in 1989 Brewster was able to carry on essentially the same business as it had when operating under an R.O.L. after 1975 and prior to 1989. Nevertheless, through the affidavit of Bud Brewster it is contended that the company was unable to undertake other business, either under an agreement that it had with the C.P.R. for guest services at Chateau Lake Louise or in relation to other services, because it did not have an R.O.L. In my view, the loss of that other business is not substantiated by the evidence before me.
[6]
Among the applicant's primary concerns about its operations without an R.O.L. is that it may not be considered eligible to bid on licenses of occupation for group camping sites within the park, which licenses are expected to be put to tender for a term commencing in 1994. That prospect arises from a letter to Brewster, dated June 2, 1986, from then Park Superintendent J.E. Vollmershausen, which stated in part as follows:
"As you know, the Four Mountain Parks Management Framework limits the amount of commercial horse use allowable in Banff. Recognizing that we are now at or beyond capacity, no new camps may be opened unless an existing camp is closed down.
"Parks Canada has recognized and formalized agreements with organizations that were operating group camps over the last decade, and these agreements must be honoured. When these existing agreements expire (1994), we are willing to put the operation of these camps out to public tender, formalizing them as Licenses of Occupation. The licensed outfitters will be invited to bid on the camps. Because they are not operated for profit, the Skyline Hikers' and Trailriders' camps will not be included in this tender call. Tender criteria may include such things as operating record and willingness to contribute to trail maintenance, as well as return to the Crown."
[7]
That indication of a future tender call for operation of certain camps was reaffirmed in a letter of July 15, 1986 from the then Minister to Mr. Gordon Taylor, M.P., who had written to urge that Brewster not lose its license as a result of departmental policy changes. The Minister, in reply then wrote, in part,
"In effect, the Management Framework formalizes the operation of the limited number of group camps that have existed in the park for many years. The businesses and organizations that operated these camps were given the privilege of occupying park lands without charge under terms and conditions designed to protect the environment and minimize user conflicts. Mr. Brewster had this privilege when he operated his business in Banff townsite. When he sold this business in 1974, however, he ceased to operate the group camps, and the privilege of doing so was subsequently given to Warner and MacKenzie. Instead, Mr. Brewster has operated an outfitting and guiding business outside the park at Seebe.
"In view of Mr. Brewster's renewed interest in the group camps, however, I propose to call for public tenders on their operation when the agreements with the camps' existing operators expire in 1994. The Skyline Hikers' and Trailriders' camps will not be included in the tender call, because they are not operated for profit. The Park Superintendent has written to Mr. Brewster concerning this proposal; I have enclosed, for your information, a copy of his letter."
[8]
In 1975 Brewster had sold part of its business to another firm, Warner & MacKenzie Guiding & Outfitting Limited. On the basis of statutory declarations made by Bud Brewster and by Malcolm MacKenzie, an officer of Warner & MacKenzie, both made in 1986, which are exhibits to an affidavit of Bud Brewster sworn October 22, 1991, I conclude that not all of the Brewster business was sold under that agreement in 1975 and the agreement did not relate to the plaintiff's license as a resident outfitter in the Park. The assets conveyed were horses, equipment, certain stables situate within the Park, and contracts with a number of users of horse outfitting services, including the C.P.R., Banff Springs Hotel, and the Trail Riders of the Canadian Rockies. The statutory declarations of Brewster and of MacKenzie both set out that the 1975 sale
"did not include any backcountry rights belonging to the Vendor other than those inferred by the sale of the above contracts and that Brewster Mountain Pack Trains, or its officers, could and would continue to operate in the backcountry of Banff National Park in the capacity of an outfitter, outfitting for riding and hiking clientele. At no time did Brewster Mountain Pack Trains Ltd. sell exclusive outfitting rights, or privileges, so that it could continue to outfit in the backcountry of Banff National Park."
[9]
As a result of the 1975 sale to MacKenzie & Warner and, of later decisions by Parks Canada, Brewster's activities in more recent years were effectively restricted. The decisions of Parks Canada, made in 1985, in the course of developing plans for management of the Park, were that six campsites used annually by commercial outfitters would be allocated to two other commercial firms that had been licensed to use those camps in the years after 1975, and that certain nonprofit backcountry excursion groups of longstanding, by agreement directly with Parks Canada, would be granted rights to exclusive use of other camps used on a rotating basis within the Park. This meant that the plaintiff after 1985 operated under an outfitting services contract with Skyline Hikers of the Canadian Rockies, one of the nonprofit excursion groups, and with the possibility of contracts for small groups using so-called fly-camps or moving camps under the same restrictions as applied to private horse users. Under its R.O.L. Brewster had been authorized to operate with some 40 horses in Banff National Park in 1988, apart from its operations at Lake Louise.
[10]
While it is not entirely clear from the record, I conclude, on the basis of the affidavit evidence filed, that the circumstances of the licensing arrangements as they affected Brewster's operations can be described as follows.
(a) For many years, operating under an R.O.L., Brewster dealt directly with the Park Administration for access to and operation of campsites, including those it would occupy from season to season as a commercial operator and those occupied on a rotating basis by one of the established nonprofit hiking clubs, i.e., Skyline Hikers or Trail Riders, for which it provided outfitting services. This continued at least for the arrangements in relation to Skyline Hikers, even after the sale in 1975 of part of the Brewster business to Warner & MacKenzie. After the 1975 sale Brewster did not carry on commercial operations in those campsites occupied each year by commercial users and it did not provide outfitting services to the Trail Riders, but it did so provide services under contract with Skyline Hikers.
(b) In 1985 Parks Canada, acting in accord with general principles evolving in the Four Mountain Park planning program, made agreements with two other commercial operators, Warner & MacKenzie and Paul Peyto, for occupation and use of the six standing campsites which they had used on an annual basis since 1975, and it decided that other backcountry campsites, used on a rotating basis about once every five years, would be allocated by agreement between Parks Canada and the main nonprofit hiking groups of longstanding, including Skyline Hikers and Trail Riders. Outfitting of Skyline Hikers continued to be provided by Brewster under agreement with the hikers group, but Parks Canada no longer dealt with Brewster about accessibility to the campsites. From Parks Canada's point of view it was prepared to agree to arrangements for Brewster to have access, for its own commercial purposes, to the campsites leased to Skyline Hikers for a limited time before and after the season agreed upon between Parks Canada and the Hikers, so long as the latter were agreed, and so long as Brewster provided outfitting services to the Hikers. Brewster indicates that Skyline Hikers was not prepared to agree to such use and that organization indicated that if Brewster did make use of campsites as proposed by Parks Canada then the Hikers group would terminate its contract for outfitting services with Brewster. Thus, until 1988 Brewster continued to provide its services to Skyline Hikers, to carry on operations at another campsite in the area of Lake Louise which is not relevant to the issues here raised, and apparently to provide contract services for small groups for day-rides or with fly-camps, operating from Banff under its annual R.O.L.
(c) In 1989 Brewster was refused an R.O.L. but it continued to operate under another form of business license for operations in the park, providing services to Skyline Hikers and the other services it had provided before 1989. Curiously enough, following the refusal to issue an R.O.L. to Brewster in 1989, correspondence from Parks Canada to the applicant indicated that if Skyline Hikers were to insist that its contract for outfitting services be with a licensed outfitter, Parks Canada would issue to Brewster a "nonresident outfitters' license", whatever that might mean.
[11]
I have noted earlier that the decisions about Brewster's license were made in the context of an evolving plan for management of Banff National Park. It is useful to review that evolution briefly. That plan was developed in accord with the
National Parks Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. N-14, s. 5, as amended by S.C. 1988, c. 48, s. 4 which provides, in part:
"5(1) ... the administration, management and control of the parks shall be under the direction of the Minister.
"5(1.1) The Minister shall, within five years after the proclamation of a park, under any Act of Parliament, table in the House of Commons a management plan for that park in respect of resource protection, zoning, visitor use, and any other matter that the Minister deems appropriate.
"5(1.2) Maintenance of ecological integrity through the protection of natural resources shall be the first priority when considering park zoning and visitor use in a management plan.
"5(1.3) The Minister shall review the management plan of a park every five years and shall table any amendments to the plan with the plan in the House of Commons.
"5(1.4) The Minister shall, as appropriate, provide opportunities for public participation at the national, regional and local levels in the development of parks policy, management plans and such other matters as the Minister deems relevant. ..."
[12]
In accordance with the
Act
a planning process was undertaken in relation to Banff and three other national parks in the mountain area. The planning process was carried on in several stages and each, apparently, involved a process of consultation with the public. The initial phase, designed to identify matters that should be considered, included public consultation in 1981 or 1982. One of the matters of concern identified then was the use of horses in the park and the effects that increasing use might have on the natural ecology. Thereafter, a background paper on Horse Use was developed and made available to interested members of the public concerned with the development of the Four Mountain Parks Planning Program. Essentially that paper recognized the importance of horse use in the backcountry, but in light of concern about effects of more extensive or intensive horse use upon the natural ecology it proposed that the status quo be maintained particularly by limiting the number of camps to those already in operation. That paper and others were circulated for discussion at public meetings in 1984 or 1985 which apparently led to development of what was sometimes referred to as an "Interim Backcountry Management Plan" but may have been no more than a draft proposal, approved by an assistant deputy minister, of the Four Mountain Park Plan developed for public discussion and thereafter perhaps approved by the Minister. A key concept of the "Interim Backcountry Plan" was that commercial horse use in the Parks, and the total number of nights for group camping under commercial operations or nonprofit organizations should not be increased. This concept was apparently carried forward in subsequent phases of the planning process.
[13]
After approval of the Four Mountain Park Plan the next stage in the process was the development of "core concepts" for the four mountain parks. Proposals concerning Banff National Park were published in December 1986 and distributed to the public in January 1987 for discussion. The document includes the following passage concerning backcountry groups camps.
"Three types of backcountry group camps have been operated in Banff. First, nonprofit organizations such as the Alpine Club of Canada may request permission to establish a group camp for a special occasion (e.g., General Mountaineering Camp). Permission is only granted for a single season. The remaining types are associated with the Park's long tradition of commercial horse outfitting. The second type involves semi-permanent tent camps operated by commercial horse outfitters. There are six of these camps. Finally, two nonprofit organizations -- the Trail Riders of the Canadian Rockies and the Skyline Hikers -- have been permitted to establish a series of rotational camps which are used once in five or ten years. Resident commercial horse outfitters are hired by these organizations to supply and run the camps, and in the case of the Trail Riders, provide horses for the use of the organization's members."
Among the core concepts proposed is the following
"P. The privilege of continuing to use group camps in areas managed to provide semi-primitive and primitive opportunities will be extended to two nonprofit organizations and two resident horse outfitters. Although requests to substitute camps to improve the quality of user experiences or reduce impacts will be reviewed, no increase in the number of camps will occur. Formal group camp agreements specifying the terms and conditions for each camp will be established with the appropriate camp proponent."
[14]
Public meetings were held in several locations, including Banff, in February and March of 1987. It should be here noted that while Parks Canada circulated information about the planning process and the papers developed in that process, and about public meetings to discuss these, to many interested groups and individuals, there is no record that the applicant, or Bud Brewster its president, was ever on the mailing lists used by Parks Canada in seeking to reach out to those with an interest in the planning process. In a supplementary affidavit of October 22, 1991, Bud Brewster avers that "At no time was Brewster informed that there were public meetings being held during this period with respect to commercial horse use." Yet he does not claim to have been ignorant of the general planning process even if he did not have formal notice of it. He was resident at all material times in Banff, the plaintiff company operates in Banff, and correspondence which Bud Brewster wrote to the then Minister of the Environment in 1986 and 1987 implies that at that time he was aware of the planning process and at least some of the proposals evolving in it, including proposals that might affect commercial horse operations in the Park. In a letter of April 23, 1987, Brewster wrote to the then Minister, concerning proposals for the management plan for the Park, in part in the following terms:
"Pertaining to s. 4.1(e) of the Banff Core Concept (Backcountry Opportunity & Facilities) and specifically to Backcountry Group Camps, I wish to draw your attention to the fact that I, President of Brewster Mountain Pack Trains (Banff) Ltd., am extremely concerned regarding the clause listed on p. 44 of this document stating as follows 'The Privilege of Continuing to use Group Camps in Areas managed to provide semi-primitive and Primitive Opportunities will be extended to two nonprofit organizations and two resident horse Outfitters.'"
[15]
At the conclusion of public meetings and after considering written submissions received, the Banff Park Management Plan was submitted with a recommendation for its approval to the Minister of the Environment. It was approved by the Minister in November, 1988 and was tabled in the House of Commons by him in December 1989.
[16]
That plan for the Park was not in evidence before me but in the course of argument counsel for the respondent Minister did advise that the Management Plan provided (at page 102, in Section P of s. 4.3, "Recreation Activities"):
"The existing conditions in the Park regarding commercial horse outfitting and horse-assisted group camps will continue, that is, the Park will continue to license only two resident commercial horse outfitters: Warner MacKenzie Guiding and Outfitting Limited and Paul Peyto's Timberline Tours, and permit only three organizations to operate rotating group camps in the backcountry: Alphine Club of Canada, Skyline Hikers of the Canadian Rockies, and the Trail Riders of the Canadian Rockies."
That advice confirms the first portion of that quotation as it had been set out in the affidavit of Bud Brewster filed August 22, 1990.
[17]
Two things seem curious about this provision of the plan. The first is that without bothering to define the term "resident outfitter" in the plan for the Park, as the plan came to be applied the expression "resident outfitter" is taken to mean one entitled by agreement with Parks Canada to access to and occupation of semi-permanent camps. That occupation was originally provided under an agreement separate and apart from the terms of any R.O.L., and the applied interpretation changed the understanding which appears to have prevailed until at least 1988 about the terms of a resident outfitter's license.
[18]
In his letter of April 25, 1986, to Brewster, the Superintendent of the Park wrote, in part:
"As requested I would like to provide clarification pertaining to commercial horse use in Banff National Park. An outfitting business license does not confer any rights of land tenure or occupation, nor does it confer any right to establish and operate group camps. It does however, confer the right to provide services to groups (such as the Skyline Hikers) and individuals under the same restrictions as private horse users. For instance, fly camps or moving camps are acceptable in the backcountry under certain conditions (overnight use permits, grazing permits, number of people in the party, etc.)."
The licensing status of Brewster, with an R.O.L., remained unchanged until 1989. The plan for the Park, at least as it has been interpreted, then appears to have equated an R.O.L. with the separately licensed right to occupy semi-permanent group camps, and rather than directly limiting access to those camps to two commercial operators which had been licensed to occupy them in recent years, as the core concepts for the plan had proposed, the plan in its final form provides for limiting resident outfitter's licenses to those two commercial operators, both of whom were named in the plan.
[19]
Counsel for the respondent Minister, in argument, urged that the Minister in approving the plan, recognizing his statutory primary responsibility to maintain the natural ecology of the Park, had implicitly equated the right to a resident outfitter's license to the right to establish permanent or semi-permanent group camps. The argument on behalf of the Minister is circular, i.e., from 1975 to 1989 Brewster had no right to operate semi-permanent camps which were allocated by agreements other than the terms of outfitter's licenses to two other commercial operators, and no right to operate rotational camps after 1985 when those were allocated to nonprofit excursion groups. Thus, since it had no right to use of camps it had no claim to an R.O.L. after 1989. The argument is not only unhelpful, it ignores the fact that Brewster had been issued an R.O.L. for many years until 1989.
[20]
The applicant urges that there is no statutory or regulatory authorization for adoption of a definition of "resident outfitter" that includes licensed occupation of campsites, and that by dictionary definitions of the two words, Brewster, in light of its activities and its base in Banff qualifies as a resident outfitter. The term is not defined in the
Act
, the
National Park Business Regulations
enacted under the
Act
, or in the plan for the Park. Nevertheless, in my view, the
National Park Business Regulations
are sufficiently broad to permit definition of the terms of any license and to permit determination of the number of licenses to be issued by the Superintendent of the Park provided in doing so he or she acts in accord with the policy of the
Act
and
Regulations
. In considering license applications he or she must act in accord with the principle of fairness, applicable in this as in other cases of administrative decision making. (See generally
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(3d) 671; 78 C.L.L.C. 14,181, and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(3d) 385; 13 C.R.(3d) 1; 50 C.C.C.(2d) 353, per Dickson, J. (as he then was), at pp. 622-623, 628-629 S.C.R.).
[21]
The second curious aspect of the final plan, as it is reported, is that it specifically designates by name the two commercial enterprises to which resident outfitters' licenses will be issued during the life of the plan, that is, Warner & MacKenzie and Paul Peyto. In my view, the statutory authority of the Minister to develop a management plan for a park is a legislative power, in the sense that the Minister has discretion to establish the basis for management of particular parks, in light of the policy objectives set out in the
Act
and
Regulations
. A legislative power is usually assumed to be one that seeks to provide generally applicable principles, rules or guidelines that are then applied to particular circumstances. A legislative power is not generally considered one to settle particular circumstances between potentially competing private interests, unless Parliament clearly provides otherwise. Whether the
Act
here authorizes a management plan that specifically names the parties to whom particular licenses are to be granted through the five year life of the plan is an issue that was not argued. Suppose one of the named licensees goes out of business, or does not meet its obligations under its license agreements? Since the plan itself was not adduced in evidence and since these questions were not argued, I do not comment further, except to suggest that the questions might be addressed by the respondent Minister in any review and revision of the plan to be effective from 1994.
Certiorari And The Management Plan
For The Park
[22]
The applicant's claim to certiorari to quash the Management Plan approved for the Park is not supported with argument that the Minister acted beyond his authority in approving the plan except insofar as the process followed in its development and approval was said to be unfair. While it is urged that Brewster, in view of its longstanding interest in providing outfitting services in the Park, did not have appropriate notice of meetings where horse use in the backcountry was to be discussed, in my view it is clear from correspondence originated by Bud Brewster in the 1985-87 period that he was generally aware of some, if not all, of the proposals emerging from the planning process. Moreover, he was resident in Banff, the applicant corporation was based there, and public notice of meetings concerning the discussion of matters to be included in the plan for the Four Mountain Parks phase and for the development of core concepts for the plan for the Banff Park, were carried in newspapers and by radio in the region. I am not persuaded that in the public discussion process generally followed in development of the plan there was any unfairness to the applicant.
[23]
Any unfairness in the process, in my view, must be related primarily to the limitation expressly included only at the final stage of the Banff plan, after public discussion, so far as I can determine, which limited commercial licenses for resident outfitters to two named enterprises, not including the applicant, even though until that time it had held an R.O.L. for many years. The core concepts for the Banff Plan, released for public discussion, as noted earlier, did propose that continuing use of group camps would be limited to two resident horse outfitters, in addition to camps to be used by nonprofit organizations, but it said nothing about limiting R.O.L.s to the two outfitters which had arrangements for use of commercial camps in recent years. The final plan as it came to be interpreted, implicitly equated camp use by commercial operators to the terms of a resident outfitters' license, even though the plan did not expressly so provide. In my view, Brewster has a legitimate complaint that there appears to have been no notice of an intention to limit licenses in the final text of the Plan to fewer than had been granted at least since 1975.
[24]
The respondent urges that inconvenience, uncertainty and disruption resulting from an order quashing the plan or any part of it is wholly disproportionate to any benefit accruing to the applicant, and that the applicant has no locus standi in respect of the Banff Park Management Plan. In my view, neither argument resolves the issue facing the court in considering certiorari to quash the Plan. That issue is simply whether the process followed in development of the Plan and its ultimate content are within the authority vested in the Minister under the
Act
.
[25]
The general purposes of national parks, which are the key to administrative authority under the
Act
, are set out in s. 4:
"4. The National Parks of Canada are hereby dedicated to the people of Canada for their benefit, education and enjoyment, subject to this Act and the regulations, and the National Parks shall be maintained and made use of so as to leave them unimpaired for the enjoyment of future generations."
The statute provides an outline of principles of the authority vested in the Minister, to direct the administration, management and control of the Park (s. 5(1)); to table in the House of Commons a management plan for the Park in respect of resource protection, zoning, visitor use, and any other matter the Minister deems appropriate, and in relation to zoning and visitor use, maintenance of ecological integrity through the protection of natural resources shall be the first priority (ss. 5(1.1) and 5(1.2)); to review a management plan of the Park every five years and to table amendments to it in the House of Commons (ss. 5(1.3)); and to provide opportunities for public participation at the national, regional and local levels in the development of parks policy and management plans (s. 5(1.4)).
[26]
In this case the process of public participation in the development of the plan for the Park was fostered and encouraged, except for the limitation of R.O.L.s to two, which appeared for the first time in the final draft of the plan. There is no evidence whether that specific limitation was introduced as a result of public discussions in relation to the proposed core concepts for Banff Park before the final version was drafted and recommended to the Minister. There is no question that the Plan in general and even the basis of the provision in question, maintaining but not extending backcountry horse use in the Park, was intended to maintain ecological integrity through protection of natural resources. Even if it be conceded that the number of licenses has no direct relevance to the goal of protecting natural resources, since the terms of licenses and the access to backcountry campsites and trails may be controlled by arrangements other than licenses, as in the past, by Park authorities on behalf of the Minister, and even if it be conceded that the provision as finally written in the plan was less than wise, it was not argued and I do not find that the provision of the plan here in question is beyond the authority of the Minister under the
Act
. Thus, there is no basis for this court to intervene by certiorari to quash the management plan for the Park.
[27]
What then is the status and nature of the management plan? I accept the submission on behalf of the respondent that upon its approval by the Minister in November 1988 the management plan for the Park became effective. Tabling in the House of Commons, here done in December 1989 is a statutory requirement under the
Act
, but the Minister has full responsibility for the management and administration of the Park and for development of a management plan within that responsibility. It is also his or her responsibility to review the plan periodically and to table amendments in the House. It was suggested by counsel for the respondent that once approved, the management plan was binding in the same way Regulations under the
Act
would be, but I am not persuaded that this is so. The requirements for a plan are included with other provisions in s. 5 for administration of parks which is within the authority of the Minister, not within s. 7 which provides a wide range of matters upon which the Governor-in-Council, not the Minister, may make Regulations. Moreover, the nature of a management plan generally is to provide a framework of principles, standards or objectives which are to be used as guidelines for particular decisions in future. The more detailed the provisions of a plan, for example in the naming of those who shall be recognized as providing services, the more likely it is that the plan will have to be modified as conditions, including major players, change. Thus, in my view, the fact that the plan as approved stipulates that resident outfitters shall be limited to two, cannot legally be more than guidance for the Minister and those who act for him under the plan. The Minister remains responsible for administration and management of the Park on an ongoing basis in light of conditions as they may evolve, regardless of what a management plan previously approved by him or her may provide.
Certiorari And Decisions Not To Issue
An R.O.L. To The Applicant
[28]
I turn to the applicant's claim to certiorari to quash decisions refusing the issue of an R.O.L. An outline of the process of application, refusal and appeal of those decisions is necessary, as is consideration of relevant provisions of the
National Parks Business Regulations
. The latter provide, in part:
"3. No person shall, within a park, carry on any business listed or described in these Regulations or the schedule unless he is the holder of a licence to carry on that business.
"4(1) The Superintendent may, upon application, issue to any person a licence to carry on the business described in the application.
. . . . .
"8. The Superintendent may, for any reason that he considers sufficient in the interests of the park, refuse to issue a licence for any business.
"9. The Superintendent may
(a) revoke any licence if the licensee fails to comply with the terms and conditions of his licence or these Regulations; and
(b) reinstate a licence revoked under paragraph (a) upon such terms and conditions as he may prescribe.
"10. Where the Superintendent
(a) refuses to issue a license under s. 8, or
(b) revokes a licence under s. 9
the applicant or licensee may appeal to the Minister, and, if the Minister is satisfied that the Superintendent was not justified in refusing the application or revoking the licence, he may order the Superintendent to issue or reinstate the licence."
[29]
Brewster's last R.O.L. was valid until March 31, 1989. Unlike the practice prevailing in previous years it was not sent a renewal notice. In May 1989 the company applied for renewal of its R.O.L. but it was then advised it would not be renewed. By an undated letter received by the applicant on June 1, 1989, John Low, Banff Townsite Manager set out the reasons for his refusal to renew the R.O.L., stating "The Banff National Park Management Plan specifically states that there will only be two resident outfitters, Brewster Mountain Pack Train (Banff) Ltd. is not included in this category." In that letter no reference was made to the fact that Low was acting on behalf of the Superintendent but by affidavit sworn February 6, 1991, David Day, Superintendent of Banff National Park, states that "the application was refused by an official of Environment Canada on my behalf and on my instructions". Since both s. 2 of the
Act
and s. 2 of the
National Parks Business Regulations
define "Superintendent" as including the Superintendent of the park and any person authorized by him to act on his behalf, it is clear that Low, in refusing Brewster's application was acting on behalf of the Park Superintendent and, I find no merit in the applicant's submission that the decision not to reissue an R.O.L. was not made by the person authorized by the
Regulations
to make the decision.
[30]
On June 8, 1989, Bud Brewster wrote to the then Minister, apparently sending his letter forward through the good offices of the Member of Parliament for the riding of Wild Rose, describing the letter as an appeal to the Minister pursuant to the
National Parks Business Regulations
, and seeking an order directing the Superintendent of the Park to issue a resident outfitter's license to Brewster. On July 25 the then Minister wrote in response to the Member of Parliament. That letter does not expressly reject Brewster's appeal but sets out an explanation of the Department's position. In so doing it sets out some surprising factors "to clarify the situation". Those factors are set out in the following quotations, upon each of which I comment.
"... In 1974, when Mr. Brewster sold that business to Warner and MacKenzie Ltd., the privilege to hold a resident outfitter's licence was transferred to the new owners."
(Comment - I have earlier noted that there was no intention on the part of Brewster and of Warner and MacKenzie to transfer the former's license as a resident outfitter to the purchasers.)
"... The Park Superintendent indicated to Mr. Brewster, in a letter dated April 25, 1986, that the Canadian Parks Service recognized only Warner and MacKenzie and Mr. Paul Peyto as resident commercial horse outfitters because they were the only operators providing that service in the park."
(Comment - With respect, the letter referred to does not state this. What it does state is that the two firms referred to were the operators of semi-permanent camps over the last ten years, that, after the sale of part of its operations to Warner and MacKenzie, Brewster had not operated group camps other than those associated with Skyline Hikers and "Therefore we recognized these extant operators and gave them formal permission to use certain sites as group camps, under conditions formalized in a group camp agreement."
The Minister's statement in 1989 can only have meaning in the context of the implicit definition, not expressed, in the final plan for the Park, that a resident outfitter was one with agreed access to and occupation of a group camp. Otherwise, the final phrase that the other two firms were the only operators providing commercial outfitting services in the park is not true, since until March 1, 1989 Brewster had operated as a commercial outfitter in the Park with an R.O.L.)
"... I have enclosed a copy of the letter [i.e., the Superintendent's letter of April 25, 1986], for your information. As you will note the Superintendent also indicated that this situation was to be stipulated in the Banff Park Management Plan which was under preparation at that time. Brewster Mountain Pack Trains continued to hold a resident operator's licence pending approval of the management plan, although no resident outfitting had been undertaken by the company since 1974."
(Comment - With respect, I do not read the letter referred to as having indicated what the Minister states it did. It does refer to a final decision in relation to commercial horse use as having evolved from the planning process for the Four Mountain Park Plan, and the Interim Backcountry Management Plan leading up to it, and that decision is expressed as a general principle, "The total number of nights for both types of group camping will not be permitted to increase." It is that principle, from the Four Mountain Park Plan, which the Superintendent's letter states "will be further clarified in the Banff Park Management Plan".
Again the final phrase in this portion of the Minister's letter, "no resident outfitting had been undertaken by the company since 1974", can only be meaningful if "resident outfitting" is equated to "operating commercial group camps", a term not previously considered to be a condition or term of an R.O.L.)
"... If, however, Skyline Hikers or any other nonprofit group requires a licence as a prerequisite for its outfitter, park officials are prepared to issue a nonresident outfitter's licence to Mr. Brewster."
(Comment - With respect, this would appear to suggest that licensing arrangements are to be based on determinations of others, not authorized to make such determinations by the statute or regulations.)
[31]
Presumably a copy of the Minister's letter reached Brewster through the concerned Member of Parliament in the summer of 1989 but this is not clear from the evidence before me. Bud Brewster had apparently continued to seek clarification of the basis for refusal of his application for an R.O.L. from Park officials, even though he had been granted a business licence or licenses which permitted him to carry on with activities as in previous years. By letter of August 18, 1989, the Park Superintendent wrote to confirm a number of matters that had been discussed or were the subject of correspondence between him and Bud Brewster. Among other matters, the Superintendent wrote:
"... to highlight the Minister's confirmation of our recent actions in implementing the directions of the Park Management Plan - specifically that 'the existing conditions in the park regarding commercial horse use outfitting and horse assisted groups camps will continue - that is the Park will continue to license only two resident commercial outfitters - Warner MacKenzie Guiding and Outfitting Ltd. and Paul Peyto's Timberline Tours'. Consequently, as we have communicated to you earlier, since no other resident outfitter licenses are to be issued or renewed, none will be forthcoming with respect to Brewster Mountain Pack Trains Ltd."
[32]
There is no evidence of further efforts of Brewster to invite reconsideration of its licence arrangements until April 17, 1990, when the applicant's solicitor wrote to the then Minister, seeking to initiate an appeal under s. 10 of the
Business Regulations
in relation to the letter of August 18, 1989, from the Superintendent of the Park and urging that the Superintendent be ordered to issue or reinstate the R.O.L. to Brewster. When no response was received a follow up letter was sent by the solicitor on May 29, 1990. By letter of July 30, 1990, the then Minister responded that the matter had already been the subject of an appeal under s. 10 of the
Regulations
, that it could not be appealed again, and that the Superintendent's letter of August 18, 1989, was in reference to the Minister's decision on the appeal. Enclosed were copies of the original appeal and the decision, being copies of Bud Brewster's letter of June 8, 1989, and the then Minister's letter of July 25, 1989, addressed to the Member of Parliament through whom Brewster's letter of appeal had been forwarded. Soon after the response of July 30, 1990, was received, the applicant initiated these proceedings for judicial review by filing notice of motion on August 22, 1990.
[33]
The applicant's principal arguments are that the decision of the Minister was based on irrelevant considerations and that there was a lack of procedural fairness in the decision refusing the application for an R.O.L. The case is said not to be one involving an application in the sense that the applicant was seeking a right or privilege it had not previously enjoyed, rather it is said the decision is in effect one to cancel a license in that failure to renew a form of license held over at least 30 years, which the applicant had legitimate expectations would be renewed, requires notice of the case to be met and an opportunity to address it before the decision not to renew is made. It is urged that there was, in this sense, no fair hearing and no opportunity to be heard or to be represented by counsel, that the initial decision of Mr. Low was made without consideration of the merits of Brewster's application and only with reference to an inflexible policy that only two R.O.L.s be issued, thus fettering discretion of the decision maker, and finally that the decision was not reasonable in that it was apparently based on errors of fact and without any relationship to the ultimate responsibility to protect the ecological integrity of the Park since the R.O.L. and the right to occupy group camps were not synonymous.
[34]
Insofar as the decision of the Minister, in considering Brewster's appeal from the decision of Park officials to refuse a licence, was based upon factors set out in the Minister's letter of July 25, 1989, I am persuaded that the Minister's decision in relation to the appeal was based upon improper factors. He appears to have accepted that by the 1975 sale of part of its business Brewster transferred its privilege to hold an R.O.L. to the purchaser. That privilege it held from Parks Canada and neither Bud Brewster nor the purchaser intended the sale to include Brewster's right to provide outfitting services. The Minister also accepted that after the sale Brewster was no longer a resident outfitter in the Park and had undertaken no resident outfitting in the Park. There was no requirement before 1989 for a resident outfitter, in order to hold an R.O.L., to have the right, by separate agreement, to occupy group camps, and Brewster had continued to operate under an R.O.L., issued annually, until March 31, 1989. It continued to provide outfitting services under that license to Skyline Hikers, and to carry on its other commercial activities, as the terms of its license up to 1988 permitted. It simply was not a fact, despite the Minister's assumption, that only Warner and MacKenzie and Paul Peyto were providing services of a resident outfitter in the Park.
[35]
In my view the applicant did not have notice of the change in definition or qualification for a resident outfitter's license, i.e., to have agreed rights to occupation of group camps under separate agreements. That change, as I have found, was first introduced implicitly, not expressly, by the final terms of the management plan for the Park as it was approved and applied. In my view, failure to consider the significance of such a change for the applicant, and failure to consider that it had operated for many years under an R.O.L., while applying strictly the provisions of the plan limiting the privilege of holding an R.O.L. to two others named in the Plan, constituted a fettering of the discretionary authority vested by Regulations in the Park Superintendent.
[36]
It may be argued that after approval of the management plan by the Minister, the Superintendent and the Minister only had authority to grant an R.O.L. to two others named in the plan, but that argument assumes a legal status for the plan which, as I have already indicated, is not justified. It is not equivalent to a regulation. While it does provide guidance for administration of the Park, its provisions must be followed in a manner consistent with the Minister's obligations under the
Act
to serve the objectives there set out, and under administrative law principles to do so in a manner consistent with the principle of fairness towards those affected by the administrator's decisions. If particular provisions of the approved plan are found to be in conflict either with the Minister's obligations under the
Act
or with obligations under the law to act fairly in decisions affecting others, the provisions of the plan must give way. A decision made in reliance upon the plan's provisions may be quashed by certiorari in circumstances where it is concluded that the process by which the decision was made violates the principle of fairness.
[37]
For the respondent it is urged that there was no violation of that principle in this case. Certainly the record is replete with correspondence indicating Brewster's efforts to explain its position with a view to protecting its interest in maintaining its status under license as a resident outfitter. That correspondence in 1985 to 1987 concerned the decision of Parks Canada, under the evolving Four Mountain Parks Plan, to provide for occupation to group camps by the other two commercial outfitters and by the nonprofit excursion associations, by agreements separate from their licenses. The later correspondence in 1989-90, concerned the decision of Parks Canada to refuse to issue an R.O.L. to Brewster, after the decision was made, and it sought to appeal that decision and to have it reversed. The first set of correspondence clearly was not taken into consideration by Mr. Low, acting for the Superintendent, at the time he refused to issue the license. It is not clear to what extent, if at all, the representations of Brewster in the later correspondence were considered by the then Minister when he dealt with Brewster's appeal for none of the representations by Brewster are referred to in the Minister's letter.
[38]
In written submissions and in oral argument the respondent submits that Brewster had notice and opportunity of hearing to address the very issue complained of in this motion, that it availed itself of opportunities to make representations respecting its position, that it was aware of development of policy for the Park and that it failed to conduct business as a resident outfitter notwithstanding knowledge of the impending changes in Park policy. The last of these submissions is based on the definition or qualification of "resident outfitter" as one with an agreed arrangement for use of group camps, not expressed in the management plan but implied in its application, it ignores the fact that the applicant continued to hold a license as a resident outfitter in the Park until March 31, 1989, and also the fact that Brewster did not have agreed access to group camps by reason of the decisions of Parks Canada in 1985.
[39]
With respect, both parties tended to confuse, in argument about hearings and opportunities to be heard, the right to be represented by counsel and other aspects of the principle of fairness, the process of public hearings in the development of the management plan, and the process of decision making in relation to Brewster's application for a license. The two are not unrelated in the sense that the management plan as approved is among the factors to be considered in deciding whether to issue the license for which application is made, but it is not the only factor.
[40]
In my view, the management plan might have provided expressly for a definition or qualifications for a resident outfitter's license in the very terms which by implication the administration adopted for its application. That was not done. Rather, by expressly providing for only two resident outfitters' licenses to be issued, to the two named firms which had agreements separate from their licenses to use of group camps, the administrators have assumed a qualification for an R.O.L., not previously a term for such a license, and have done so without notice of the change either in the evolving process for the management plan, or in relation to renewal of a license to the applicant. In my view, that assumption was not consistent with the principle of fairness and a decision made not to issue a license in reliance upon the plan is subject to being quashed.
[41]
For the respondent it is urged that in this case the court should decline to exercise its discretion to grant certiorari because the applicant unreasonably delayed in initiating judicial review. Also it was urged that the applicant has carried on, under other forms of license, the activities which it had conducted prior to 1989 and thus that its interests were unaffected by the decision not to issue an R.O.L. Current activities do seem unaffected, but the applicant is concerned that its status without an R.O.L. may affect its prospects in future, for example, if it were to lose its contract to provide outfitting services to Skyline Hikers, or if the right to use group camps is put to tender as the then Minister proposed in 1986. Moreover, the application has come forward and been argued precisely because both parties, the applicant and the Minister, have attached considerable significance to the status of a holder of a resident outfitter's license, without necessarily agreeing upon the nature of that status.
[42]
What of the question of delay in commencing judicial review? It is clear the court may decline to exercise discretion where the applicant for judicial review has unreasonably delayed initiating action even in the absence of statutory provisions such as the current s. 18.1 of the
Federal Court Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7, as amended, which became effective February 1, 1992, after these proceedings were commenced. That section provides for an application for judicial review to be made within 30 days after the decision was first communicated to the party directly affected thereby, a time limitation not applicable under the statute at the time these proceedings were initiated. In this case time would not have begun to run against the applicant's interest in judicial review until after receipt of the Minister's decision by his letter dated July 25, 1989, in relation to the applicant's appeal under the
National Parks Business Regulations
, assuming the applicant did receive that letter, or at the latest upon receipt of the Superintendent's letter of August 18, 1989. While nothing further was done until April 17, 1990, counsel for the applicant urges that the step then taken, to write again to the Minister instituting an appeal under the
Business Regulations
, was undertaken because of uncertainty about the meaning of the Minister's response to the earlier appeal by the applicant. Once there was a clear response to that second attempt to have the matter satisfactorily resolved by the informal appeal process provided by the
Regulations
, the applicant acted promptly to initiate these proceedings.
[43]
The only time interval not adequately explained which might be seen here to affect the applicant's claim to relief is from August, after receipt of the letter of August 18, 1989 from the Superintendent of the Park, which confirmed the position of the Minister in relation to the applicant's appeal, and the decision of Mr. Low refusing to issue an R.O.L., until April 17, 1990 when solicitors for the applicant again initiated an appeal under the
Business Regulations
. That is a period of about eight months. In my view, in the circumstances of this case, that time period is not so unreasonable that the court should decline to exercise its discretion. The respondent's interests are not prejudiced, in my view, if the decision not to issue a license is quashed.
[44]
In a strict sense it might be considered that such a decision, coupled with an order that the application be reconsidered in light of all relevant factors, would be futile since even if an R.O.L. were issued to Brewster that would have been valid on an annual basis only until March 31, 1990. Yet, insofar as decisions rendered in relation to later applications by Brewster were subject to the same limited considerations as were here applied, they too should be reviewed and reconsidered.
Mandamus And The Decision Not
To Issue An R.O.L.
[45]
For the respondent it is urged that mandamus does not lie where the decision questioned is one involving discretion. That principle must be qualified where there is a public duty to exercise the discretion and its exercise has not met the duty of fairness. When the decision is quashed for that reason, the decision maker's decision is a nullity and the outstanding duty, to exercise the discretion fairly, remains.
[46]
Having found that the decision here made did not meet the required standard of fairness to Brewster, the applicant for a license, I have no hesitation in ordering that the application for an R.O.L. be referred back to the Superintendent of the Park for reconsideration in light of all relevant factors. Those factors include the following:
1) Brewster was the holder of a resident outfitter's license for more than 30 years and under that license it provided commercial outfitters' services in the Park until March 31, 1989;
2) The management plan for the Park, though approved by the Minister, provides only guidance for future administration of the Park;
3) There is no express definition of a "resident outfitter" for purposes of a license in the management plan, none was clearly set out at anytime in development of the plan and it would be unfair to rigidly apply a particular definition inferred from the plan by administrators and not anywhere expressed, in dealing with the application for an R.O.L. by Brewster.
Conclusion
[47]
For these reasons an order goes quashing the decision, made on behalf of the Superintendent of the Park, as noted in the letter of June 1, 1989, from John Low, not to issue a resident outfitters' license to the applicant. With that goes a further order that the applicant's application for an R.O.L., made in May 1989, be reconsidered in light of all relevant factors, including those set out in these reasons, and insofar as later applications by Brewster for licenses in subsequent years were considered without reference to all the relevant circumstances, those later decisions also warrant reconsideration.
[48]
The applicant's claim to certiorari to quash the management plan for Banff National Park is dismissed.
[49]
The applicant seeks costs on a solicitor and client basis. There is no ground for considering such costs. The court's
Rules
(rule 1608) provide that "No costs shall be payable in respect of an application for judicial review unless the court, for special reasons, so orders." That rule became effective February 1, 1992, with amendments to the
Federal Court Act
, establishing particular procedures for judicial review under s. 18.1. While that effective date is after this application was filed, it antedates the hearing of this matter and is applicable to it. I was not persuaded at the hearing that there are special reasons to warrant costs being awarded. I note, moreover, that success on the claims to relief is divided after some claims were withdrawn or modified by the applicant at the hearing, after prehearing preparations were undertaken by the respondent in relation to all claims originally specified.
Application allowed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/blk
[End of document]