[1]
Wetston, J.
: This is an application to review and set aside the decision of the Convention Refugee Determination Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board (the "Board") dated July 8, 1993, wherein the applicant was determined not to be a Convention refugee.
[2]
The applicant is a citizen of Sri Lanka. He is a Buddhist Sinhalese and was born in Dehiwala which is about two miles south of Colombo. Since 1970 the applicant was involved in the Sri Lankan Freedom Party (SLFP). That party was in power in Sri Lanka from 1970 to 1977. They were defeated in 1977 by the United National Party (UNP). The applicant continued his involvement with the SLFP until 1990 when he resigned his membership. The applicant then became involved with the New Democratic United National Front (DUNF) which split off from the UNP. In early 1991, the applicant attended two meetings at the home of the chief organizer of the DUNF for his district and on April 23, 1991, he formally joined the party and was appointed as an organizer for his area. The applicant testified that due to his strong opposition to the UNP through the activities he undertook for the DUNF, he was threatened on many occasions by members of the Special Task Force (STF). In August of 1992, the applicant claimed that several members of the STF came to his house at Dehiwala. He saw them getting out of their vehicles and managed to escape out the back door. The applicant testified that after he fled, the STF returned and finding that he was not there, threatened his wife and ransacked the house. The applicant fears that if he is returned to Sri Lanka he will be arrested by the STF.
[3]
The Board found the applicant's testimony to be straightforward until he was asked to describe his participation in the DUNF. In their reasons the Board focused on the applicant's testimony that the DUNF was founded in January 1991, by Lalith Athulathmudali. The applicant argues that the Board breached the principles of natural justice when during the hearing, members of the Board stated that they accepted the applicant's account regarding the formation of the DUNF but later in the reasons stated that the applicant was mistaken about this point and concluded as a result that he had no more knowledge about the DUNF than the average citizen. The finding in question is found at p. 5 of the Board's reasons:
"According to the documentary evidence, Mr. Athulathmudali resigned from cabinet on August 30, 1991. Mr. Athulathmudali and seven other dissident petitioners kept their parliamentary seats while appealing their expulsion from the UNP. On December 3, 1991, after the Supreme Court of Sri Lanka decided that their expulsion was valid, they lost their seats in parliament. The documentary evidence states that they would join the newly formed DUNF. It seems that Mr. Athulathmudali is considered the leader of the DUNF, not the founder."
The Board made this finding despite an exchange which occurred during the hearing.
"RHO: That's -- I wanted to clear that up. Because initially, I believe it mentioned there was eight ministers. Okay. Now coming back to the foundation of this D.U.N.F. Now, up until August 30th of 1991, Athulathmudali was a member of the U.N.P. Can you explain how he would go about forming another party, when he is a member of the U.N.P. already, and a cabinet minister?
"Claimant: Yes, he had sent in his resignation, but the government had not accepted it. He started in January 1991, to tour Sri Lanka -- visit all the areas in Sri Lanka, and explain this to the youth that he has the intention of forming a party. But he formally resigned on August 30, 1991.
"Marziali [Board Member]: Mr. Kawun, the panel is satisfied that the claimant is totally aware of the changes in the party. And also, we don't have any doubts about how Mr. Athulathmudali became a -- to be a leader of this party. I'm not sure exactly where the question is leading to.
"RHO: Well, it just seems to me that an area of concern would be here a gentleman who is a cabinet minister in the U.N.P. trying to form another party, and this party not doing anything about it. He is being dealt -- that's what I'm trying to clarify with the claimant. How could this man form a party while being associated with the ruling party of the government.
"Marziali [Board Member]: Do you happen to have any comment concerning that?
"Riddell [Board Member]: Well, only that from reading some of the documentary evidence -- or the more recent documentary evidence, it seems ultimately that the group was expelled from parliament as a result of the Supreme Court decision. And the claimant has explained that, in fact, the resignation was tendered but not accepted. I think it is entirely possible to be as it were, employed one place, and doing something else." (pp. 321-322 of the Tribunal's Record)
[4]
It was argued that the Board erred in failing to give the applicant an opportunity to address the inconsistency focused on by the Board in rendering their decision. The comments made by the Board during the hearing suggest that the Board accepted the applicant's testimony regarding the formation of the DUNF. The question to be considered is whether the Board erred by impeaching the applicant's credibility on the basis of this very testimony in rendering their decision. More specifically, did the Board members, by their conduct at the hearing, breach a fundamental principle of natural justice by denying the right of the applicant to meet the case against him?
[5]
The decision of Mahoney, J.A., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), dealt with a similar issue. In that case, after hearing the oral testimony of the applicant and before the RHO or counsel had a chance to make oral representations, the presiding member announced that the Board was only concerned with the connection of the persecution feared by the claimant to a Convention refugee ground. The presiding member requested in the interests of time that the representations of counsel and the RHO be made by way of written submissions. Neither the RHO nor the claimant's counsel dealt with the issue of credibility in their submissions which were later sent to the Board. Nevertheless, the negative determination of the Board was made largely on the basis of adverse findings of credibility. Mahoney, J.A., writing for the court, found as follows on p. 2:
"There has been a gross denial of natural justice here. The panel had stipulated that the appellants feared persecution and that the only issue was whether that persecution was encompassed in the Convention definition. It proceeded, on grounds of credibility, to negate its stipulation. The appellants were denied the opportunity to know and answer the case against them by a deliberate decision of the presiding member in which his colleague acquiesced."
[6]
The situation in the case at bar is somewhat different in that the Board did not explicitly specify which issues should be addressed in the representations by counsel. However, in my view, the effect of the Board's comments was the same as that in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra. The adverse finding of credibility on the issue of the formation of the DUNF was used to discredit the applicant's testimony that he was actively involved in that party. His participation in the DUNF was a central aspect of the applicant's claim. It was not open to the Board to give the claimant a false impression during the hearing that his oral testimony regarding his knowledge of the formation of the party had been accepted and then later impeach his credibility on the basis of that testimony.
[7]
Accordingly, the application for judicial review is allowed. The matter is returned to a differently constituted panel for rehearing and reconsideration.
Application allowed.
Editor: David Weir/gas
[End of document]