[1]
Teitelbaum, J.
: This is an application for an order setting aside the decision of the Convention Refugee Determination Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board (the Board), dated June 8, 1994, wherein it was determined that the applicant, Graciela Quintero, was not a Convention refugee.
[2]
An application was made and granted to amend the name of the respondent to read Minister of Citizenship and Immigration.
Background
[3]
The applicant is a 20 year old citizen of Mexico. The applicant came to Canada on January 10, 1993 and made her claim to refugee status on March 18, 1993, based on her political opinion as a supporter of the Democratic Revolutionary Party (PRD), an opposition party in Mexico. The applicant added that her fear of persecution related to her father's support for the PRD.
[4]
The applicant indicated that her father was one of the leaders of the Cadernista party (the proper name for the Cadernista Party is the Partido de las Revolucion Democtratica, the Democratic Revolutionary Party) and became involved with the party from 1987 to 1992. The applicant also indicated that she, along with her mother and brother attended the public meetings that were held around Puerto Vallarta, in support of her father and his political connections.
[5]
The applicant stated that in April of 1992, while waiting for a bus outside of school, two people with disguises stabbed her and punched her. Her friends intervened and managed to call an ambulance to take the applicant to the hospital. The applicant indicated that this attempt on her life was the foundation of her fear of persecution. According to the applicant this attack prompted her to leave Puerto Vallarta for Barra de la Navidad at the end of May 1992, where she remained for about three months.
[6]
The applicant added that after the attack she and her family received threatening phone calls. Some of the phone calls were directed at the applicant and some were directed at her father. The threats related to applicant's and her father's activities with the PRD.
[7]
According to the applicant, she lived in constant fear and that is why she left Puerto Vallarta and stayed with friends in Barra de la Navidad. She returned home in August 1992 to write her final examinations. The applicant stated the threatening telephone calls continued and as a result of this continued harassment she left Mexico in December 1992.
[8]
In her PIF the applicant indicated that she took a bus to Tijuana and then crossed the border in a private car to San Diego, Los Angeles and Seattle. On January 10, 1993, she walked into Canada near the Douglas B.C. border crossing. The applicant also indicated that she did not present herself to officials at the border. The applicant stated that when she arrived in Canada she stayed with friends and had no idea how to make a refugee claim until she met a Spanish speaking person in March 1993. According to the applicant, this person took her to D.E.Y.A.S where one of the Spanish speaking counsellors explained to her that she should report to officials at Canada Immigration.
Decision Of The Convention Refugee
Determination Division - Immigration
And Refugee Board
[9]
It was noted in the Board's decision that the hearing was heard before L.M.K. O'Brian and Charles Groos, but that Ms. O'Brian ceased to hold office as a member of the Immigration and Refugee Board on April 5, 1994. While she was requested by the Chairperson to take part in the disposition of the matters previously heard pursuant to s. 63(1) of the
Immigration Act
, the eight week period ended on May 27, 1994. As such, Ms. O'Brian was unable to take part in the disposition of this matter and pursuant to s. 63(2) of the
Immigration Act
, Mr. Groos's decision constituted the decision of the Refugee Division in this case.
[10]
The Board member was of the opinion the applicant's claim would be determined primarily by an assessment of the applicant's personal credibility and concluded the applicant was not a Convention refugee.
[11]
In his reasons, the Board member noted the following at pp. 11 and 12:
"In my opinion, there is no plausible explanation for the above range of problematic aspects to the claimant's testimony which is consistent with the presumption of truthfulness in testimony. Both her written and extemporaneous testimony suggested that her father had been active within the PRD as a single political entity from 1987 until the RHO directed her attention to contradictory evidence indicating that the party had not been formed until 1988. Her response that its formation was preceded by similar groups is glib. Her assertion that it was the largest opposition party must be wrong in the light of the clear contradictory assertion in a reputable reference manual which she regarded as sufficiently trustworthy to present a further copy of as exhibit 10.6. Her swift assertion that she had worked for three or four months at the restaurant in Barra de la Navidad in 1991 rather than 1992 when it must have seemed to her that continuing to assert this employment had been in 1992 would have made her story less plausible is not only contradicted by exhibit 4 but is also an indication of a substantial disregard for her obligation to testify truthfully. Her failure to promptly initiate a Convention refugee claim upon her arrival is unreasonably inconsistent with a sincere desire to assuage a fear of persecution, which was allegedly the cause of her coming here because she had heard that Canada protects legitimate refugees. I cannot accept that it takes a Spanish-speaking person of the claimant's education, age, and experience, nearly two months in Vancouver to acquire the needed assistance to attend at an immigration office and initiate a claim.
"In all the circumstances, I find that the factors which have impeached the claimant's credibility as above extend to touch upon and displace the presumption of truthfulness in all of her particular uncorroborated allegations of fact material to a fear of persecution. However, despite my suggestion that supporting documentation should be acquired and filed to corroborate the claim, nothing material to a fear of persecution was.
"The PRO membership card which the claimant presented on March 11, 1994, and which was received as exhibit 6 is not material to her alleged foundation for a fear of persecution which she says arose prior to signing her PIF on May 2, 1993. It only confirms that as of January 12, 1994, the claimant was a party member in good standing. By itself, this is not a foundation material to any fear of persecution."
Applicant's Position
[12]
The applicant argues that the Board failed to observe a principle of natural justice or procedural fairness by rendering a decision with only one panel member taking part in the actual decision. In support of this argument, the applicant relies on
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (FCA) as authority for the proposition that unless an applicant consents to his/her decision being rendered by one panel member, it is a breach of natural justice or fairness for that one panel member to render a decision.
[13]
The applicant's position is essentially that the Board erred in rejecting the applicant's credibility. In this regard, the applicant submits the Board erred in finding the applicant failed to submit evidence material to a fear of persecution, and taking that factor into consideration in its assessment of the applicant's credibility. The applicant maintains the Board erred by wholly ignoring the documentary evidence submitted concerning conditions in Mexico and the effect of these conditions on persons in the applicant's particular situation.
[14]
The applicant argues the Board erred in law by basing its decision on evidence that was not properly before it. In this regard, the applicant asserts the Board erred in referring to the
U.N.H.C.R. Handbook on Procedures and Criteria for Determining Refugee Status
, the
Federal Court Rules
and the
B.C. Supreme Court Rules
, as that material was not specifically before it and therefore should not have been relied upon by the Board as the basis for a negative finding regarding the applicant's credibility. The applicant also argues the Board erred in law in deciding the applicant was not credible because she failed to provide the Board with the medical report and other documentation requested by the Board member. The applicant maintains that she did everything reasonably possible to provide these documents and did obtain certain documentary evidence. The applicant noted that she visited a medical clinic in Vancouver to corroborate her claim of being attacked and the scars she received from the attack.
[15]
The applicant submits the Board erred in finding the applicant not credible because of inconsistencies in the applicant's viva voce evidence at the hearing and with the information contained in her PIF. The applicant asserts the Board was nitpicking and was engaged in an "over-vigilant and microscopic examination of apparent inconsistencies" of the applicant's evidence. The applicant further submits that the inconsistencies were not central to the applicant's claim. The applicant notes the inconsistencies regarding the applicant's employment at Prego, could be classified as innocent misunderstandings and that the applicant provided a letter of reference from Prego, which confirmed the applicant was employed from July 1992 to October 1992. The applicant makes a similar claim with respect to the applicant's belief that the PRD was the official opposition party. The applicant also explained the applicant's confusion regarding when her father joined the PRD and when the party was formed.
[16]
The applicant argues the Board erred in drawing a negative inference in respect of the applicant's credibility from the delay in making a refugee claim. The applicant referred to
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), as support for the proposition that the mere fact there was a delay in making a claim cannot be a decisive factor in rejecting a claim. The applicant also argues that the Board's reference to the applicant's delay in initiating her claim, given her age and education was not reasonable and that the Board was obliged to accept the applicant's explanation for why she delayed for two months after her arrival in Canada.
[17]
The applicant submits the Board erred in making a finding of fact when it stated the applicant "had heard that Canada protects legitimate refugees" and that the member inferred the applicant had obtained this information at the consulate, as there was no evidence before the Board to support such a finding or inference.
[18]
The applicant also argues the Board erred in its finding that the applicant had not adduced evidence material to a fear of persecution and referred to excerpts from documentary evidence to show there are human rights violations in Mexico, that the Mexican government remains intolerant of public criticism and that political and human rights activists have been killed in Mexico.
Respondent's Position
[19]
In response to the applicant's argument that the Board failed to observe a principle of natural justice or procedural fairness, by rendering a decision with only one panel member, the respondent submits that unlike the case before me, there was nothing on the record in the final reasons in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> to explain why only one member participated in the decision. However, in the case at bar, the decision clearly explains that recourse was being made to s. 63(2) of the
Immigration Act
and that only one panel member was making a decision. The applicant argues that <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> requires that the applicant consent to one panel member rendering a decision and if there is no consent, there can be no valid decision if the decision is signed by only one member. The respondent notes that if the applicant's argument is correct, s. 63(2) could never be engaged without the applicant's consent. The respondent argues that the proper interpretation of <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> is that if an applicant consents to a hearing by a single member or if recourse is required to s. 63(2) for the rendering of a decision, then it must clearly be put on the record. In this regard, the respondent quotes the following passage from <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> :
"When a claimant consents to or requests a hearing by a single member, that must be, as it invariably has been, clearly put on the record. It should be likewise when recourse had been had to subs. 63(2).
"As a matter of law and to ensure that justice is seen to have been done, when subs. 63(2) is properly engaged
a complete statement of the material circumstances should be put on the record
. Such statement may, of course, be included in the reasons for decision." (emphasis added)
[20]
Therefore, submits the respondent, the Board's reasons complied with the requirements set out in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> in that it gave full reasons for having recourse to s. 63(2) of the
Act
and therefore there was no breach of natural justice or procedural fairness.
[21]
With respect to the argument that the Board erred in rejecting the applicant's credibility, the respondent reiterates that this court should be reluctant to interfere with a tribunal's finding on credibility issues, as the Board had the advantage of seeing and hearing the witness. Further, this court ought not to find the Board erred in its assessment of credibility unless it is satisfied that the Board based its assessment on irrelevant considerations or ignored evidence which does not substantiate its finding.
[22]
The respondent argues that if an assessment of credibility reveals that an applicant is not credible, then there is no need for the Board to review and consider all the documentary evidence. Therefore, the Board did not err by first completing its inquiry of the applicant's credibility and determining, based on the evidence before it, that the applicant was not credible.
[23]
The respondent maintains that the Board's reference to the
U.N.C.H.R. Handbook
, the
Federal Court Rules
and the
B.C. Supreme Court Rules
, was simply to support s. 14(1)(y) of the
Convention Refugee Determination Division Rules
, which obliges a claimant at a refugee hearing to acquire any reasonably available documentation and which is consistent with the obligation in the
Handbook
, the
Federal Court Rules
and the
B.C. Supreme Court Rules
.
[24]
Further, the respondent submits that the reference to the rules governing the Convention Refugee Division could not be said to come as a surprise to the applicant, as the Board sets out the onus being upon the applicant to provide material to prove her case. The respondent also noted that requests were made both at the outset of the hearing and on resumption of the hearing three months later, to enable the applicant to obtain documents from Mexico. The respondent asserts that as the applicant was put on notice that the Board wished to see documentation, it cannot be argued the applicant was unaware or surprised that the Board referred to the fact that the applicant had not provided documents which were relevant to her fear of persecution.
[25]
The respondent also attempted to distinguish this court's decision in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.). According to the respondent, this is not a situation where the applicant provided a reasonable explanation for why an arresting report was not available, confirmed by the documentary evidence, and the Board nonetheless made an adverse finding. In the case at bar, the applicant advised the Board
she had
certain documents, namely medical reports and documents relating to the expropriation of her parents' properties and her political membership. However, after an adjournment of three months and despite having other documents sent from Mexico, the applicant could not provide the documents requested. The respondent submits that the Board was entitled to take into account the fact the applicant had not provided certain evidence which she stated she had in Mexico and would have assisted her claim.
[26]
The respondent maintains the discrepancies between the information provided by the applicant in her PIF and in her evidence before the Board, cannot be explained away by saying the applicant was confused.
[27]
In terms of the applicant's argument that the Board erred in considering the applicant's delay in making a refugee claim, the respondent argues that the jurisprudence supports that a delay in applying for refugee status, while not decisive in itself, is something which a tribunal is entitled to consider.
[28]
The respondent's position with respect to the credibility finding, is that it was reasonably open for the Board to make its finding given the applicant's comments that she came to Canada because she heard Canada protects legitimate refugees.
[29]
With respect to the applicant's argument that the Board erred in finding the applicant had not adduced evidence material to a fear of persecution, the respondent submits that simply because documentary evidence supports that there are difficulties in Mexico does not assist the applicant in establishing her claim where her credibility itself is in issue and where the Board does not believe the underlying elements upon which she based her claim to a well founded fear of persecution. The respondent maintains that as the Board did not accept the applicant's credibility, it was unnecessary for it to engage in an analysis of the documentary evidence which was before it.
Discussion And Conclusion
[30]
At the close of the hearing, I adjourned the matter to a later date in order to enable the applicant further time to produce the documents she had failed to produce before the Board, that is, the applicant's medical report, her parents' expropriation document or documents and the applicant's political membership documents.
[31]
Counsel for the respondent objected stating that this court, on a judicial review application, had no jurisdiction to allow the production of these documents.
[32]
After giving the matter further consideration, I agree with this submission. On a judicial review application, it is not for the Judge hearing the application to substitute his or her view of what the outcome of the adjudication should have been provided the hearing before the Board was conducted in accordance with the proper application of the law and the proper appreciation of the facts (see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.).)
[33]
Therefore, it is for the Board to make its decision based on, amongst other factors, the documentary evidence
produced before it
. It is not for a Judge on judicial review to assess documents not produced before the Board to conclude that the Board rendered its decision in a manner not in accordance with the law or without a proper appreciation of the facts.
[34]
In addition, counsel for the applicant was unable to produce the documents within the delay that I allowed for the productions of the said documents.
[35]
With all due respect that I have for applicant's counsel, I see no merit to her submission as to why I should allow the present judicial review.
[36]
With regard to the issue of the decision of the Board being signed by one single member, I am satisfied, basing myself on the decision of <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> that the Board's decision, signed as it is by only one Board member, is valid. The Board gave a detailed explanation in its decision as to why only one member of the Board signed the decision. At p. 4 of the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> decision, Mr. Justice Mahoney states:
"Absent consent, a claimant is entitled to a hearing by a two-member panel and is entitled to the benefit of any disagreement between them. Recourse to subs. 63(2) is a serious matter which denies a claimant a right accorded by the
Act
. A decision made by a single member is prima facie made without jurisdiction. When a claimant consents to or requests a hearing by a single member, that must be,
as it invariably has been, clearly put on the record. It should be likewise when recourse has been had to subs. 63(2).
"As a matter of law and to ensure that justice is seen to have been done, when subs. 63(2) is properly engaged a complete statement of the material circumstances should be put on the record. Such statement may, of course, be included in the reasons for decision." (emphasis added)
[37]
Clearly, in the case at bar, the Board member gives a detailed explanation as to the reason why only one member of the Board signed the decision.
[38]
As to the issue of credibility, I see no reason to interfere with the Board's decision. The applicant appeared before the Board and gave evidence. The members of the Board who signed the decision was in the best position to see and hear the applicant and judge from her answers what, if any, credibility should be accorded the applicant.
[39]
I am satisfied that the decision under review is a valid one and should not be interfered with.
[40]
The application for judicial review is denied.
[41]
Neither party submitted a question to be certified.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Angela E. McKay/ldl
[End of document]