[1]
MacKay, J.
: Two separate applications for a stay of a departure notice were heard at the same time by telephone conference call on September 15, 1993, with counsel for the applicants in Charlottetown, counsel for the respondents in the court premises in Halifax and the court sitting in Ottawa. Both raise similar issues and are based on similar evidence.
[2]
After hearing submissions of counsel I dismissed the applications and orally outlined my reasons. Counsel for the applicants requested reasons in writing. There are my reasons, now filed in accord with s. 51 of the
Federal Court Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7 as amended. These reasons relate to the two applications, as the styles of cause herein indicate, and I direct that these reasons be filed on each of the applicants' files.
[3]
The applicants, who are husband and wife, each seek a stay of a departure order issued by an immigration adjudicator following a hearing in an inquiry under s. 27(3) of the
Immigration Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2 as amended. That inquiry was ordered in relation to reports that each of the applicants is a person in Canada, other than a Canadian citizen or a permanent resident, who entered Canada as a visitor and remained beyond the time permitted by the visitor's visa and extensions granting permission to remain until April 30, 1993, and that each of the applicants is a person who is a member of an inadmissible class as a person who there are reasonable grounds to believe has been convicted outside Canada of an offence that, if committed in Canada, would constitute an offence that may be punishable by way of indictment under any act of Parliament by a maximum term of imprisonment of less than 10 years.
[4]
The applicants entered Canada in June 1992, with their infant son Tristan. All are citizens of the Federal Republic of Germany. Since October 1992, the applicants have made their residence in Morrell, Prince Edward Island, and they wish to remain and make their home there with their son Tristan, and a second son born in Morrell, P.E.I.
[5]
In April 1993 the applicants were interviewed by an immigration officer in relation to their request for renewal or extension of their status as visitors. That request was denied. During the course of the interview the immigration officer was advised by the applicants that each had been convicted of possession of hashish in Velbert, Germany in October 1990, for which each was fined, but neither served any time in jail. In May 1993, after the applicants had overstayed the term of their visitors' status, the immigration officer completed the reports which led to the inquiry on August 3, 1993, and to the issue of departure orders directed to each of them.
[6]
In the course of that inquiry, in addition to records from the applicants' files relating to their admission and visitors' status in Canada and the direction for the inquiry, there was before the adjudicator documents relating to each of the applicants issued by the Chief Federal Prosecutor at the Supreme Court of Germany in Berlin in April 1991, which indicated that "there was no entry", apparently equivalent to no criminal record, in the name of either of the applicants. There was also a letter of June 28, 1993 from the officer in charge of the R.C.M.P. Drug Section in P.E.I. to an immigration officer in Charlottetown advising that in Canada it is an offence under the
Narcotic Control Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. N-1, s. 1, to possess, traffic and import narcotics including cannabis products such as cannabis resin, which is hashish.
[7]
The departure order was deemed to be served on each of the applicants on or about August 17, 1993 and it apparently allowed 30 days for the applicant to remove themselves from Canada or the departure order would be deemed to be a deportation order.
[8]
The applicants made application to the Minister seeking a permit to be landed from within Canada on humanitarian and compassionate grounds, an application not determined at the time of the hearing of the application for a stay. On August 25, 1993 each of the applicants also filed an application in the court seeking leave and judicial review in relation to the determination of the adjudicator, in each case, that the applicant was a person in Canada who had overstayed a visitors' visa without authorization and that each was a person in an inadmissible class as one who had committed an offence outside Canada, which if committed in Canada, would have been subject to imprisonment for a term as set out in the
Immigration Act
. It appears that the applicants continued to seek resolution of their situation but when no decision was made in relation to their application for landing on humanitarian and compassionate grounds, in view of their arrangements to leave Canada on September 16, 1993 in accord with the departure order, an application was also filed in the court for a stay of proceedings under the departure order pending a decision by the Minister on the application for landing on humanitarian grounds, or, if that were negative, pending determination of their applications for leave and for judicial review.
[9]
For the applicants it is urged that there are serious issues before the court raised by the application for leave, that the process provided under the
Immigration Act
and followed by the adjudicator raises issues concerning the applicants' rights under the
Charter
and that there are serious questions concerning admissibility and assessment of evidence before the adjudicator about the offenses said to have been committed abroad by the applicants, particularly in the face of records from Germany which indicate neither claimant has a criminal record. Counsel for the respondent disputes that there are arguable issues raised in the application for leave.
[10]
In view of the differences in the views of counsel, I assume for purposes of considering the stay application, at this stage when there are no written submissions before the court in relation to the issues raised by the applications for leave and for judicial review, that the latter applications do raise arguable issues which are now before the court.
[11]
I am not, however, persuaded that the applicants in these cases have established irreparable harm would befall either of them if a stay were not granted. In the affidavits of each of the applicants filed in support of their application for a stay it is averred that they have become "very attached to the persons of our community and wish to prevent the separation of our two sons from the community which they know as their home", that the youngest son is a Canadian citizen having been born in Morrell, P.E.I. and that they have no home in Germany and they fear for their children's welfare and security if they are required to return there. Counsel acknowledged that there is not a fear of persecution in terms of physical harm to the applicants but the stress and uncertainty of ordered removal to Germany at this stage, when there is an application before the Minister and another before the court, both undetermined, constitute irreparable harm. Prior to coming to Canada there was no work available for them and they had no accommodation in Germany. Since their arrival in Canada, they have been living off their savings, have managed to establish a home for their children and have been accepted and strongly supported by the community in Morrell, and even by prospective employers.
[12]
It was urged that the balance of convenience in these cases favoured the applicants since no harm could be said to be occasioned to the respondent by the grant of a stay. Further, there would be no adverse reaction to the grant of a stay, indeed the local public interest in the Morrell community would support a stay. Finally, it also was submitted that there was a general public interest in the respondent having the benefit of a judicial decision in relation to the important issues raised by the application for leave and for judicial review.
[13]
Difficult as the circumstances may appear to the applicants if they are required to leave Canada, their circumstances do not constitute irreparable harm as that has come to be defined by jurisprudence. Mere economic dislocation or difficulties or inconvenience do not constitute irreparable harm in circumstances where, at this time, neither applicant has a right to remain in Canada.
[14]
It is unnecessary to consider the balance of convenience at length in these cases in which the balance clearly favours the respondent, taking into account the public interest in the discharge of statutory responsibilities by the Minister. (See, Beetz, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Man.R.(2d) 241, at pp. 146-150.)
[15]
I conclude that in these applications for a stay the applicants have failed to meet the standards that would warrant a stay as outlined in the decision of Heald, J.A., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.).
[16]
Thus, the application for a stay is dismissed in each case, and an order to that effect was issued at the conclusion of the hearing of this matter on September 15, 1993.
Applications dismissed.
Editor: Janette Blue/sms
[End of document]