 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (FC)
MLB unedited judgment
[French language version follows English language version]
[La version française vient à la suite de la version anglaise]
Rahim Hussaini, Noor Hussaini, Reena Hussaini, Rahima Hussaini, Khalid Hussaini and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  CF 239)
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
Federal Court
Mandamin, J.
February 21, 2012.
Counsel:
Matthew Jeffrey, for the applicants;
Bernard Assan, for the respondent.
Solicitors of Record:
Matthew Jeffery, Toronto, Ontario, for the applicants;
Myles J. Kirvan, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Toronto, Ontario, for the respondent.
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary. Any footnotes found in this case will appear below end of document.
[1]
Mandamin, J.
: The Applicants have applied for judicial review of the April 12, 2011 Immigration Officer's decision refusing the Applicants' application for permanent residence under the Convention Refugees Abroad and Humanitarian Protected Persons Abroad category.
[2]
The Officer decided the Applicants were resident in Afghanistan and not refugees residing in Pakistan and further found the Applicants did not have a well founded fear of persecution.
[3]
For reasons that follow, I am granting this application for judicial review.
Facts
[4]
Mr Rahim Hussaini, the Principal Applicant, and Mrs. Noor Hussaini, his wife, and their children are citizens of Afghanistan who claimed to be resident in Pakistan.
[5]
The Applicants say they fled Afghanistan for Pakistan sometime around 1982 as a result of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. The Applicants travelled to Peshawar, Pakistan, and then on to Karachi. The Applicants remained there for 15 years before they moved to Rawalpindi where they now live as refugees. The Applicants say they were not legally in Pakistan and face many difficulties.
[6]
The Applicants were sponsored by a group of Canadian citizens including the Principal Applicant's sister-in-law who is a police officer in Calgary.
[7]
The Immigration Officer interviewed the Principal Applicant in Pakistan on January 13, 2011. Following the interview, the Officer sent the Principal Applicant a letter dated April 12, 2011 providing the reasons for the refusal of their application.
Decision Under Review
[8]
The Officer's reasons for refusing the Applicants' application are found in both the refusal letter dated April 12, 2011 as well as the CAIPS notes. In the refusal letter, the Officer observes that the Principal Applicant was interviewed with the assistance of an interpreter fluent in English and Dari and that the Principal Applicant did not indicate that he had any difficulty in understanding the translator or in having the translator understand him.
[9]
The Officer set out the relevant statutory provisions, then stated that he was not satisfied that the Applicants were members of the Convention Refugee Abroad class or the Country of Asylum class because the Officer was not satisfied as to the credibility of the information provided by the Principal Applicant. The Officer noted that the Principal Applicant stated he travelled to Jalalabad to obtain their tazkiras (identity cards) and passports. The Officer stated they could have acquired these from one of the Afghan Consulates in Pakistan. The Officer was not satisfied that they would have returned to Afghanistan solely to obtain these documents and was not satisfied that they had been residing in Pakistan rather than Afghanistan.
[10]
The Officer was not satisfied that they met the Country of Asylum class definition. The Officer found that the reasons provided for not wanting to return were linked to the fact that they had no family in Afghanistan as well as general insecurity. The Officer found the Applicants had not demonstrated that they were and remain seriously and personally affected by the conflict in Afghanistan. The Officer also stated the Principal Applicant had indicated a fear of persecution due to their religion as Ismailis. Taking this into consideration as well as the present circumstances in Afghanistan, the Officer held that he was not satisfied that they had a well founded fear of persecution if they were returned to Afghanistan and was therefore not satisfied that they met the Convention Refugee Abroad definition.
Standard of Review
[11]
The Supreme Court of Canada has held in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ] that there are only two standards of review: correctness for questions of law and reasonableness involving questions of mixed fact and law and fact. The Supreme Court has also held that where the standard of review has been previously determined, a standard of review analysis need not be repeated: <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> at para 62.
[12]
Credibility findings are fact based. They are to be reviewed on a reasonableness standard and are entitled to a high degree of deference:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (FCA) at para 4.
[13]
Recently the Supreme Court of Canada has affirmed that a review of the adequacy of reasons must be done in the analysis of whether the decision as a whole, both the reasons and the result, is reasonable:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  ACWS (3d) 435 at para 22.
[14]
Accordingly, the appropriate standard of review of whether the Officer's reasons with respect to credibility were adequate is reasonableness. Similarly, the appropriate standard of review of the Officer's reasons with respect to the question of Convention refugee status is also reasonableness.
Relevant Legislation
[15]
The
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act
, SC 2001, c 27 provides:
96. A Convention refugee is a person who, by reason of a well-founded fear of persecution for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group or political opinion,
(a) is outside each of their countries of nationality and is unable or, by reason of that fear, unwilling to avail themself of the protection of each of those countries; or
(b) not having a country of nationality, is outside the country of their former habitual residence and is unable or, by reason of that fear, unwilling to return to that country.
96. A qualité de réfugié au sens de la Convention - le réfugié - la personne qui, craignant avec raison d'être persécutée du fait de sa race, de sa religion, de sa nationalité, de son appartenance à un groupe social ou de ses opinions politiques:
a) soit se trouve hors de tout pays dont elle a la nationalité et ne peut ou, du fait de cette crainte, ne veut se réclamer de la protection de chacun de ces pays;
b) soit, si elle n'a pas de nationalité et se trouve hors du pays dans lequel elle avait sa résidence habituelle, ne peut ni, du fait de cette crainte, ne veut y retourner.
[16]
Immigration and Refugee Protection Regulations
, SOR/2002-227 [
Regulations
] provides:
145. A foreign national is a Convention refugee abroad and a member of the Convention refugees abroad class if the foreign national has been determined, outside Canada, by an officer to be a Convention refugee.
...
147.
A foreign national is a member of the country of asylum class
if they have been determined by an officer to be in need of resettlement because
(a)
they are outside all of their countries of nationality
and habitual residence; and
(b)
they have been, and continue to be, seriously and personally affected by civil war, armed conflict or massive violation of human rights in each of those countries.
[Emphasis added]
145. Est un réfugié au sens de la Convention outre-frontières et appartient à la catégorie des réfugiés au sens de cette convention l'étranger à qui un agent a reconnu la qualité de réfugié alors qu'il se trouvait hors du Canada.
...
147. Appartient à la catégorie de personnes de pays d'accueil l'étranger considéré par un agent comme ayant besoin de se réinstaller en raison des circonstances suivantes:
a) il se trouve hors de tout pays dont il a la nationalité ou dans lequel il avait sa résidence habituelle;
b) une guerre civile, un conflit armé ou une violation massive des droits de la personne dans chacun des pays en cause ont eu et continuent d'avoir des conséquences graves et personnelles pour lui.
Issues
[17]
Two issues are determinative of this judicial review:
1. Was the Officer's credibility finding unreasonable?
2. Was the Officer's negative finding with respect to a well founded fear of persecution reasonable?
Analysis
[18]
The Applicants submit that the Officer's decision was primarily based on the negative credibility finding that the Applicants were residents of Afghanistan and not Pakistan.
[19]
The Applicants argue the Principal Applicant provided his reason for returning to Afghanistan: they needed the tazkiras in order to obtain the passports from an Afghan consulate in Pakistan. Since they did not have them, the Principal Applicant returned to Afghanistan to obtain both the tazkiras and the passports.
[20]
The Applicants submit the Officer rejected this explanation but provided no reason why the explanation was rejected, other than to say that the passports could have been obtained from an Afghan consulate in Pakistan.
[21]
The Applicants also submitted an affidavit by the sister in-law, a Calgary police officer, who was a sponsor. She declared that she had both telephoned and visited her sister in Pakistan. This evidence, however, was not before the Officer and I do not consider it as relevant evidence in this judicial review.
[22]
The Respondent argues that the Officer provided clear and cogent reasons for his belief that the Applicants were not Convention refugees under the Country of Asylum class or any other prescribed class.
[23]
The Respondent submits the Officer clearly and unequivocally stated why he did not believe the Principal Applicant's account that he had been to Afghanistan only once since 1982 and that was to apply for these documents. The Respondent submits the Officer refrained from any generalities or vague language in making its credibility finding and that the Officer provided clear and specific rationale for why it found the Principal Applicant's account not credible.
[24]
In my view, the Officer's credibility finding disbelieving the Principal Applicant's account of traveling to Kabul in Afghanistan to obtain tazkiras and passports was a crucial determination given the CAIPS notes' focus on that question.
[25]
The Officer's CAIPS notes record:
HOW DID YOU OBTAIN YOUR TAZKIRAS? I went there and obtained the tazkiras and then the passports.
SO HOW LONG WERE YOU IN AFG? 3 days.
I HAVE THE FOLLOWING CONCERNS WITH THE APPLICATION:
CREDIBILITY: THE APPLICANT STATES THAT HE IS RESIDING IN RAWALPINDI AND TRAVELLED TO JALALABAD TO OBTAIN TAZKIRAS AND PASSPORTS FOR THIS INTERVIEW. IT DOES NOT SEEM REASONABLE THAT THE APPLICANT WOULD TRAVEL ALL THAT DISTANCE TO OBTAIN THESE DOCUMENTS WHEN HE CAN OBTAIN A PASSPORT FROM ONE OF THE AFGHAN CONSULATES IN PAKISTAN WHO REGULARLY ISSUE PASSPORTS EVEN WITHOUT TAZKIRAS. WHILE IS [sic] AM REASONABLY SATISFIED THAT THE APPLICANT DID RESIDE IN PAKISTAN FOR A LONG PERIOD OF TIME, THE MORE PROBABLE EXPLANATION IS THAT THE APPLICANT NOW RESIDES IN AFGHANISTAN. [Capitals in original]
[26]
The Officer gave the Principal Applicant an opportunity to answer his concerns and recorded the answer:
Applicant: they do not issue passports without Tazkiras. I went to Jalalabad to obtain the tazkiras and the passport...
[27]
The Officer disbelieved the Principal Applicant would travel to Afghanistan to obtain a passport that could be obtained from an Afghan consulate in Pakistan.
[28]
What the Officer fails to have regard for is the December 28, 2010 Immigration Section letter to the Principal Applicant scheduling the interview and instructing him as follows:
For the interview you should bring documents that you may have for yourself and, if applicable, for your family...
Former residents of Afghanistan should bring
original and photocopies
of their
Tazkira, Shanakhati Pass
and any other identification document for them at the time of the interview, if it has not already been submitted. They should bring photocopies of all documents and
English translation
of all
Dari/Persian
documents. [Emphasis in original]
[29]
The Officer makes no reference to whether tazkiras are available from Afghan consulates in Pakistan and disregards the Immigration Section's emphasized instruction to the Principal Applicant to bring original tazkiras to the interview. The Officer would be aware of this instruction but makes no reference to it in coming to a negative credibility finding.
[30]
I conclude the Officer's negative credibility finding is unreasonable given that the Principal Applicant had a valid explanation why he went to Afghanistan to obtain the tazkiras. Simply stated, he was instructed by the Immigration Section to bring them to the interview with the Officer.
[31]
The Officer also asked the Principal Applicant why they could not return to Afghanistan and whether there was any specific danger for the Principal Applicant or his family. The Principal Applicant responded that they were Ismaili and without land in their village. In their application for permanent residence, they had stated they had lost everything and they had to leave for their safety.
[32]
Generally, the onus is on an applicant to describe what kind of fear or danger he faced. The Officer did provide the Principal Applicant with an opportunity to explain to which the Applicant explained they were Ismaili. The Officer is presumed to have specialized knowledge of the circumstances in countries such as Afghanistan. The Officer does demonstrate that he understands that the Principal Applicant's claim of fear is because of religious persecution against Ismailis in Afghanistan.
[33]
However, the Officer's analysis of the Applicants' fear of religious persecution is limited to twelve words in his refusal letter:
You have indicated fear of persecution due to your religion as an Ismaili.
Taking this into consideration as well as the present circumstances in Afghanistan
I am not satisfied that you have a well founded fear of persecution if you returned to Afghanistan .... [Emphasis added]
The Officer's notes in the CAIPS record do not set out any analysis or reasons. His only analysis is the above response.
[34]
In
Newfoundland and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  the Supreme Court of Canada stated:
Reasons may not include all the arguments, statutory provisions, jurisprudence or other details the reviewing judge would have preferred, but that does not impugn the validity of either the reasons or the result under a reasonableness analysis. A decision-maker is not required to make an explicit finding on each constituent element, however subordinate, leading to its final conclusion (Service Employees' International Union, Local No. 333 v. Nipawin District Staff Nurses Assn., [1975] 1 S.C.R. 382, at p. 391).
In other words, if the reasons allow the reviewing court to understand why the tribunal made its decision and permit it to determine whether the conclusion is within the range of acceptable outcomes, the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> criteria are met.
[Emphasis added]
[35]
The Applicants' factual information is mixed but it clearly shows they lost their possessions in Afghanistan and they feared for their safety there. To this, the Officer merely makes a general and vague statement, "Taking this into consideration as well as the present circumstances in Afghanistan", without analysis.
[36]
I find the Officer made no finding of fact nor provided any analysis for his conclusion for finding the Principal Applicant did not have a well founded fear of persecution in Afghanistan due to his Ismaili religion. I am unable to understand why the Officer decided the Principal Applicant did not have a well founded fear of religious persecution because he was Ismaili.
[37]
Neither party submitted a serious question of general importance for certification.
Conclusion
[38]
The Officer erred in his credibility finding and failed to provide reasons to find why the Applicants would not face persecution in Afghanistan. I am satisfied the Officer's finding that the Applicants are not members of either the Convention Refugee Abroad class or the Country of Asylum class is unreasonable.
[39]
I conclude that the application for judicial review should be granted.
JUDGMENT
[40]
THIS COURT'S JUDGMENT is that
:
1. The application for judicial review is allowed.
2. The April 12, 2011 decision is set aside; and the matter is remitted for re-determination by a different Immigration Officer.
3. No serious question of general importance is certified.
.........................
Rahim Hussaini, Noor Hussaini, Reena Hussaini, Rahima Hussaini,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  demandeurs ont présenté une demande de contrôle judiciaire de la décision par laquelle, le 12 avril 2011, un agent d'immigration a rejeté leur demande de résidence permanente dans la catégorie des réfugiés au sens de la Convention outre-frontières et des personnes protégées à titre humanitaire outre-frontières.
[2]
L'agent en question a déterminé que les demandeurs étaient des résidents de l'Afghanistan et non pas des réfugiés résidant au Pakistan, et que leur crainte d'être persécutés n'était pas fondée.
[3]
Pour les motifs qui suivent, j'accueille la présente demande de contrôle judiciaire.
Les faits
[4]
Monsieur Rahim Hussaini, le demandeur principal, et Mme Noor Hussaini, son épouse, et leurs enfants, sont des citoyens de l'Afghanistan qui prétendent être des résidents du Pakistan.
[5]
Les demandeurs affirment avoir fui l'Afghanistan et s'être rendus au Pakistan au cours de l'année 1982 environ, par suite de l'invasion soviétique de l'Afghanistan. Ils se sont rendus à Peshawar, au Pakistan, puis à Karachi, où ils sont restés pendant 15 ans, avant de déménager à Rawalpindi, où ils vivent aujourd'hui en tant que réfugiés. Les demandeurs soutiennent qu'ils ne se trouvaient pas au Pakistan légalement et qu'ils sont confrontés à de nombreuses difficultés.
[6]
Les demandeurs ont été parrainés par un groupe de citoyens canadiens, dont la belle-sœur du demandeur principal, qui est policière à Calgary.
[7]
Le 13 janvier 2011, l'agent d'immigration a rencontré le demandeur principal en entrevue au Pakistan. À la suite de cette entrevue, il a envoyé au demandeur principal une lettre datée du 12 avril 2011, énonçant les motifs du refus de la demande.
La décision faisant l'objet du présent contrôle
[8]
L'agent a exposé les motifs à l'appui de sa décision de rejeter la demande des demandeurs dans la lettre de refus datée du 12 avril 2011 ainsi que dans les notes du STIDI. Dans la lettre de refus, il a fait remarquer que l'entrevue menée avec le demandeur principal a été tenue en présence d'un interprète qui parlait couramment l'anglais et le dari, et que le demandeur principal n'a pas indiqué qu'il avait de la difficulté à comprendre l'interprète ou à se faire comprendre par ce dernier.
[9]
L'agent a énoncé les dispositions législatives pertinentes, puis il a affirmé qu'il n'était pas convaincu que les demandeurs étaient des membres de la catégorie des réfugiés au sens de la Convention outre-frontières ou de la catégorie de personnes de pays d'accueil, car il mettait en doute la crédibilité de l'information fournie par le demandeur principal. L'agent a souligné que ce dernier a déclaré s'être rendu à Jalalabad pour obtenir leurs tazkiras (cartes d'identité) et leurs passeports. Il a ajouté qu'ils auraient pu obtenir ces documents auprès des consulats afghans au Pakistan. Il n'était pas convaincu qu'ils seraient retournés en Afghanistan à la seule fin d'obtenir ces documents, ni n'était-il convaincu qu'ils avaient résidé au Pakistan et non en Afghanistan.
[10]
L'agent n'était pas convaincu que les demandeurs étaient visés par la définition de la catégorie de personnes de pays d'asile. Il a conclu que les motifs invoqués pour expliquer leur refus de retourner en Afghanistan étaient liés au fait qu'ils n'y avaient aucune famille et à l'insécurité générale qui y régnait. De l'avis de l'agent, les demandeurs n'avaient pas démontré que le conflit en Afghanistan avait eu et continuait d'avoir des conséquences graves et personnelles pour eux. Il a ajouté que le demandeur principal avait indiqué craindre d'être persécuté du fait de leur religion en tant qu'Ismaïliens. Il en a pris note et a pris en compte également la situation actuelle en Afghanistan, puis il a déclaré qu'il n'était pas convaincu qu'ils craignaient avec raison d'être persécutés s'ils étaient renvoyés en Afghanistan et qu'ils répondaient à la définition de réfugié au sens de la Convention outre-frontières.
La norme de contrôle
[11]
La Cour suprême du Canada a conclu, dans l'arrêt
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ], qu'il n'y a que deux normes de contrôle: la norme de la décision correcte pour les questions de droit, et la norme du caractère raisonnable pour les questions mixtes de fait et de doit et les questions de fait. Elle a indiqué également que, lorsque la norme de contrôle a été déterminée précédemment, l'analyse de la question ne doit pas nécessairement être reprise: <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , par. 62.
[12]
Les conclusions relatives à la crédibilité reposent sur les faits. Elles doivent être révisées selon la norme du caractère raisonnable et faire l'objet d'une grande retenue:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (CAF), au paragraphe 4.
[13]
Récemment, la Cour suprême du Canada a affirmé que l'examen de la suffisance des motifs doit être effectué dans le cadre de l'analyse de la question de savoir si la décision dans son ensemble, à savoir les motifs et le résultat, est raisonnable:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  ACWS (3d) 435, par. 22.
[14]
Par conséquent, la norme de contrôle applicable à l'égard de la question de savoir si les motifs de l'agent relatifs à la crédibilité étaient adéquats est celle du caractère raisonnable. De même, la norme de contrôle des motifs de l'agent relativement à la question du statut de réfugié au sens de la Convention est aussi celle du caractère raisonnable.
Les dispositions législatives pertinentes
[15]
La
Loi sur l'immigration et la protection des réfugiés
, LC 2001, c 27, prescrit ceci:
96. A qualité de réfugié au sens de la Convention - le réfugié - la personne qui, craignant avec raison d'être persécutée du fait de sa race, de sa religion, de sa nationalité, de son appartenance à un groupe social ou de ses opinions politiques:
a
) soit se trouve hors de tout pays dont elle a la nationalité et ne peut ou, du fait de cette crainte, ne veut se réclamer de la protection de chacun de ces pays;
b) soit, si elle n'a pas de nationalité et se trouve hors du pays dans lequel elle avait sa résidence habituelle, ne peut ni, du fait de cette crainte, ne veut y retourner.
96. A Convention refugee is a person who, by reason of a well-founded fear of persecution for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group or political opinion,
(a) is outside each of their countries of nationality and is unable or, by reason of that fear, unwilling to avail themself of the protection of each of those countries; or
(b) not having a country of nationality, is outside the country of their former habitual residence and is unable or, by reason of that fear, unwilling to return to that country.
[16]
Le
Règlement sur l'immigration et la protection des réfugiés
, DORS/2002-227 [
Règlement
] prescrit ce qui suit:
145. Est un réfugié au sens de la Convention outre-frontières et appartient à la catégorie des réfugiés au sens de cette convention l'étranger à qui un agent a reconnu la qualité de réfugié alors qu'il se trouvait hors du Canada.
[...]
147.
Appartient à la catégorie de personnes de pays d'accueil l'étranger
considéré par un agent comme ayant besoin de se réinstaller en raison des circonstances suivantes:
a
)
il se trouve hors de tout pays dont il a la nationalité
ou dans lequel il avait sa résidence habituelle;
b)
une guerre civile, un conflit armé ou une violation massive des droits de la personne dans chacun des pays en cause ont eu et continuent d'avoir des conséquences graves et personnelles pour lui
. [Non souligné dans l'original.]
145. A foreign national is a Convention refugee abroad and a member of the Convention refugees abroad class if the foreign national has been determined, outside Canada, by an officer to be a Convention refugee.
...
147.
A foreign national is a member of the country of asylum class
if they have been determined by an officer to be in need of resettlement because
(a)
they are outside all of their countries of nationality
and habitual residence; and
(b)
they have been, and continue to be, seriously and personally affected by civil war, armed conflict or massive violation of human rights in each of those countries.
[Emphasis added]
Les questions en litige
[17]
Deux questions permettent de trancher la présente demande de contrôle judiciaire:
1. La conclusion que l'agent a tirée sur la crédibilité était-elle déraisonnable?
2. La conclusion défavorable que l'agent a tirée sur l'existence d'une crainte bien fondée de persécution était-elle raisonnable?
Analyse
[18]
Les demandeurs soutiennent que la décision de l'agent reposait principalement sur la conclusion défavorable sur la crédibilité selon laquelle les demandeurs étaient des résidents de l'Afghanistan et non du Pakistan.
[19]
Les demandeurs soutiennent que le demandeur principal a expliqué ainsi leur décision de retourner en Afghanistan: ils avaient besoin de tazkiras pour obtenir les passeports auprès d'un consulat afghan au Pakistan. Comme ils ne les avaient pas, le demandeur principal est retourné en Afghanistan pour obtenir à la fois les tazkiras et les passeports.
[20]
Les demandeurs soutiennent que l'agent a rejeté cette explication, sans cependant motiver cette décision, si ce n'est pour dire que les passeports auraient pu être obtenus auprès d'un consulat afghan au Pakistan.
[21]
Les demandeurs ont fourni également l'affidavit de la belle-sœur, policière à Calgary, qui parrainait la demande. Elle a déclaré qu'elle avait appelé sa sœur au Pakistan et qu'elle lui avait rendu visite là-bas. Cette preuve n'a cependant pas été soumise à l'agent, et je ne crois pas qu'elle soit pertinente dans le cadre du présent contrôle judiciaire.
[22]
Le défendeur soutient que l'agent a expliqué dans des motifs clairs et convaincants pourquoi il estimait que les demandeurs n'étaient pas des réfugiés au sens de la Convention dans la catégorie des personnes de pays d'asile ou dans toute autre catégorie prescrite.
[23]
Le défendeur soutient que l'agent a déclaré clairement et sans équivoque pourquoi il ne croyait pas le récit du demandeur principal, selon lequel il n'avait été en Afghanistan qu'une seule fois depuis 1982, à la seule fin de demander les documents en question. Il affirme que l'agent s'est abstenu de formuler des généralités ou d'utiliser un langage vague lorsqu'il a tiré une conclusion sur la crédibilité, et qu'il a expliqué clairement et de manière précise pourquoi il a conclu que le récit du demandeur principal n'était pas crédible.
[24]
À mon avis, la conclusion tirée en matière de crédibilité par l'agent, qui n'a pas cru le demandeur principal lorsque ce dernier a affirmé s'être rendu à Kabul en Afghanistan pour obtenir des tazkiras et des passeports, était une conclusion cruciale étant donné l'accent mis sur cette question dans les notes du STIDI.
[25]
Dans ses notes du STIDI, l'agent a consigné ce qui suit:
[traduction]
COMMENT AVEZ-VOUS OBTENU VOS TAZKIRAS? Je suis allé là-bas et j'ai obtenu les tazkiras, puis les passeports.
COMBIEN DE TEMPS AVEZ-VOUS DONC PASSÉ EN AFGHANISTAN? Trois jours.
JE ME POSE LES QUESTIONS SUIVANTES EN CE QUI CONCERNE VOTRE DEMANDE:
CRÉDIBILITÉ: LE DEMANDEUR AFFIRME QU'IL RÉSIDE À RAWALPINDI ET QU'IL S'EST RENDU À JALALABAD POUR OBTENIR DES TAZKIRAS ET DES PASSEPORTS POUR LES BESOINS DE LA PRÉSENTE ENTREVUE. IL NE SEMBLE PAS RAISONNABLE QUE LE DEMANDEUR PARCOURT TOUTE CETTE DISTANCE POUR OBTENIR CES DOCUMENTS ALORS QU'IL POUVAIT OBTENIR UN PASSEPORT AUPRÈS DE L'UN DES CONSULATS AFGHANS AU PAKISTAN QUI DÉLIVRE RÉGULIÈREMENT DES PASSEPORTS MÊME SANS TAZKIRAS. SI JE SUIS RAISONNABLEMENT CONVAINCU QUE LE DEMANDEUR A EFFECTIVEMENT RÉSIDÉ AU PAKISTAN PENDANT UNE LONGUE PÉRIODE, IL EST PLUS PROBABLE QU'IL RÉSIDE AUJOURD'HUI EN AFGHANISTAN. [Majuscules dans l'original.]
[26]
L'agent a donné au demandeur principal l'occasion de répondre à ses questions, et il a consigné la réponse obtenue:
[traduction]
Demandeur: Ils ne délivrent pas de passeport sans tazkiras. Je suis allé à Jalalabad pour obtenir les tazkiras et le passeport ...
[27]
L'agent n'a pu croire que le demandeur principal se soit rendu en Afghanistan pour obtenir un passeport qu'il aurait pu obtenir auprès d'un consulat afghan au Pakistan.
[28]
Ce dont l'agent a omis de tenir compte est la lettre que la Section de l'immigration a fait parvenir au demandeur principal le 28 décembre 2010 pour fixer la date de l'entrevue et lui donner les directives suivantes:
[traduction]
Pour l'entrevue, vous devriez amener les documents que vous pourriez avoir pour vous-même et, le cas échéant, pour votre famille ...
Les anciens résidents de l'Afghanistan devraient amener à l'entrevue l'
original et des photocopies
de leur
tazkira
, de leur carte
Shanakhati
et de toute autre pièce d'identité qui n'aurait pas encore été soumise. Ils devraient amener des photocopies de tous les documents et une
traduction en anglais
de tous les documents rédigés en
dari/persan
. [En caractère gras dans l'original.]
[29]
L'agent ne renvoie pas à la question de savoir si les tazkiras peuvent être obtenus auprès des consulats afghan au Pakistan, ni ne tient compte de la directive dont certaines parties étaient soulignées que la Section de l'immigration a fait parvenir au demandeur principal, pour l'informer qu'il devait amener l'original des tazkiras à l'entrevue. L'agent devrait être au courant de cette directive, mais il n'en a fait aucune mention lorsqu'il en est arrivé à une conclusion défavorable en matière de crédibilité.
[30]
Je conclus que la conclusion défavorable tirée par l'agent en matière de crédibilité est déraisonnable compte tenu du fait que le demandeur principal avait une explication valide sur la question de savoir pourquoi il était allé en Afghanistan pour obtenir les tazkiras. En termes simples, il avait reçu de la Section de l'immigration la directive de les amener à l'entrevue qu'il devait avoir avec l'agent.
[31]
L'agent a également demandé au demandeur principal pourquoi ils ne pouvaient pas retourner en Afghanistan et s'il existait un danger spécifique pour le demandeur principal ou sa famille. Le demandeur principal a répondu qu'ils étaient ismaïliens et qu'ils ne possédaient aucun bien-fonds dans leur village. Dans leur demande de résidence permanente, ils ont déclaré avoir tout perdu et avoir été obligés de quitter le pays pour assurer leur sécurité.
[32]
De manière générale, il incombe au demandeur de décrire la nature de la crainte ou du danger auquel il est exposé. L'agent a effectivement donné au demandeur principal l'occasion de fournir des explications, ce à quoi le demandeur a répondu qu'ils étaient ismaïliens. L'agent est présumé avoir une connaissance spécialisée de la situation de pays comme l'Afghanistan. Il démontre effectivement qu'il comprend que la crainte que le demandeur principal prétend éprouver est attribuable à la persécution religieuse qui est exercée contre les ismaïliens en Afghanistan.
[33]
Toutefois, l'analyse de l'agent sur la crainte de persécution religieuse des demandeurs se limite à douze mots dans sa lettre de refus:
[traduction]
Vous avez dit craindre d'être persécutés en raison de votre religion en tant qu'ismaïliens.
Pour cette raison et compte tenu de la situation actuelle en Afghanistan
, je ne crois pas que vous craigniez à raison d'être persécutés si vous retournez en Afghanistan .... [Non souligné dans l'original.]
Les notes du STIDI de l'agent n'énoncent aucune analyse, ni aucun motif. Sa seule analyse est la réponse susmentionnée.
[34]
Dans l'arrêt
Newfoundland and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  la Cour suprême du Canada a dit ceci:
Il se peut que les motifs ne fassent pas référence à tous les arguments, dispositions législatives, précédents ou autres détails que le juge siégeant en révision aurait voulu y lire, mais cela ne met pas en doute leur validité ni celle du résultat au terme de l'analyse du caractère raisonnable de la décision. Le décideur n'est pas tenu de tirer une conclusion explicite sur chaque élément constitutif du raisonnement, si subordonné soit-il, qui a mené à sa conclusion finale (
Union internationale des employés des services, local no 333 c. Nipawin District Staff Nurses Assn.
, [1975] 1 R.C.S. 382, p. 391).
En d'autres termes, les motifs répondent aux critères établis dans <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> s'ils permettent à la cour de révision de comprendre le fondement de la décision du tribunal et de déterminer si la conclusion fait partie des issues possibles acceptables.
[Non souligné dans l'original.]
[35]
Les renseignements factuels du demandeur sont mixtes, mais ils établissent clairement qu'ils ont perdu leurs possessions en Afghanistan et qu'ils craignaient pour leur sécurité dans ce pays. À cet égard, l'agent se contente de faire une déclaration générale et vague « Pour cette raison et compte tenu de la situation actuelle en Afghanistan », sans aucune analyse.
[36]
Je conclus que l'agent n'a tiré aucune conclusion de fait ni effectué aucune analyse à l'appui de sa conclusion selon laquelle le demandeur principal ne craignait pas avec raison d'être persécuté en Afghanistan en raison de sa religion ismaïlienne. Je ne peux pas comprendre pourquoi l'agent a décidé que le demandeur principal ne craignait pas avec raison d'être persécuté en raison de sa religion ismaïlienne.
[37]
Ni l'une ni l'autre partie n'a proposé de question grave de portée générale à certifier.
Conclusion
[38]
L'agent a tiré une conclusion erronée en ce qui concerne la crédibilité et il a omis d'expliquer pourquoi il a conclu que les demandeurs ne seraient pas persécutés en Afghanistan. Je suis convaincu que la conclusion de l'agent selon laquelle les demandeurs ne relèvent pas de la catégorie des réfugiés au sens de la Convention outre-frontières ni de la catégorie de personnes de pays d'asile est déraisonnable.
[39]
Je conclus que la demande de contrôle judiciaire doit être accueillie.
JUGEMENT
[40]
LA COUR STATUE CE QUI SUIT
:
1. La demande de contrôle judiciaire est accueillie.
2. La décision du 12 avril 2011 est infirmée et l'affaire est renvoyée pour nouvel examen par un agent d'immigration différent.
3. Aucune question grave de portée générale n'est certifiée.
[End of document]