[1]
Dubé, J.
: This is an application under rule 469(5) to vary the terms for security set out in the order herein of Mr. Justice Teitelbaum pronounced the 25th day of June, 1990 [not reported in this series of reports].
[2]
There are two other prongs to this notice of motion which were, by consent, adjourned sine die. One seeks an order that the plaintiffs' claim against the defendants for damage and an injunction for infringement of the plaintiffs' Canadian patent be dismissed. The other is for a determination pursuant to rule 474 that the third device constructed by the defendants for repaving asphalt paved roads was one which the defendants were licensed to construct.
[3]
Time being of the essence, these Reasons for Order will be as concise as possible but after three separate hearings involving long and complex arguments as well as a hefty complement of affidavits and other material, a general overview of the background of these proceedings is essential to the proper understanding of this order.
[4]
The plaintiff Allan Rorison and the defendant Patrick Wiley are the co-inventors of a process which refurbishes asphalt paved road surfaces. They were equal shareholders in the plaintiff R.W. Blacktop Ltd. The invention of the process dates to approximately the years 1986-1987. The two partners parted as a result of what was described as "philosophical differences". This resulted in a buy-out agreement for the shares of the plaintiff R.W. Blacktop Ltd.
[5]
It appears that, at the time of negotiating the buy-out agreement and before the patent was applied for, the defendant Wiley attacked the validity of the proposed patent in light of another patent known as the "Yates Patent". In the meantime, Rorison paid Wiley the sum of $643,000 for his one-half interest in R.W. Blacktop Ltd. Included in this purchase was the ownership of the patent. Once Blacktop received its Canadian patent, it launched an action for infringement and an interim injunction against Mr. Wiley.
[6]
Teitelbaum, J., heard the application and after a two day hearing delivered his order and reasons from the bench on June 25, 1990. In short the learned judge was satisfied that the plaintiffs had an arguable case. He was not satisfied that the plaintiffs would suffer irreparable harm. Consequently he did not grant the injunction sought but he imposed terms upon the defendants. These are the terms the defendants seek to vary. The first term, to keep records, is standard in these applications when the interim injunction is denied and is not in question. The other terms are somewhat unusual. The second and third terms are for the defendants to deposit 12½% of all income received from any paving done by its machines in a special interest-bearing account in trust, as well as 25% of the sale price of any machine until final judgment be obtained in this matter. The fourth term, not in issue here, is a fixed charge on the Summerfair Shopping Centre owned by the defendants. Teitelbaum, J., was of the view that an injunction would force the defendants to close their business. He felt that the plaintiffs also needed security for their own protection. The following paragraphs carry the substance of his judgment:
"I have stated during the hearing that I have difficulty in accepting much of the evidence of Mr. Wiley. I have stated this because of the manner in which Mr. Wiley acted in relation to his ex-partner. After having sold his half-interest to Mr. Rorison and the company, I believe it's R.W. Blacktop Ltd., which interest included the patent under consideration, Wiley through his agent filed a protest with the Canadian Patent Office to have declared the patent invalid.
"Wiley received $643,000 for his half-interest and notwithstanding this went and caused to be filed the protest above mentioned. Furthermore, this action by Wiley leads me to believe that it is quite possible that the defendant through again the actions of Wiley because of what he has already done, may have purposely manoeuvred in such a way that an infringement did take place of plaintiff's patent, but this issue can only be determined at a trial. The Statement of Claim and Statement of Defence, the Statement of Defence filed clearly indicates to me that there are serious differences with regard to the facts and I believe that it's only at a time of a trial that these issues can be determined.
. . . . .
"I'm going to ask both counsel to inform me when they, to give me time delays in which they will be prepared to go through whatever has to be done in order for them to be able to get a date in the early fall or in the late fall, so that neither party should suffer and unnecessary damage."
[7]
The crux of the arguments advanced by the defendants to vary the order of Teitelbaum, J., is that the trial has been delayed one year and will be held in the fall of 1991, instead of the fall of 1990, and that circumstances have changed in such a way that, if the present terms are maintained, the defendants will be pushed into bankruptcy by their creditors. In other words, they assert that the onerous terms imposed upon them would effectively dispose of the action before they had their day in court. Effectively, Lord Diplock in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (H.L.), said at page 1306, that an application for an interlocutory injunction ought not to be:
"... a case in which the grant or refusal of an injunction at that stage would, in effect, dispose of the action finally in favour of whichever party was successful in the application, because there would be nothing left on which it was in the unsuccessful party's interest to proceed to trial."
[8]
It has also been clearly established that pursuant to rule 469(5) the court may amend the terms of an injunction, where the facts and circumstances are so different than at the time of the earlier disposition, they are no longer valid and no longer bear a relationship to reality. ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at page 231).
[9]
The changed circumstances, described by the defendants at the outset of the instant hearings, are that they have not sold any machine and that the revenue from the paving during the summer of 1990 was much less than anticipated. Consequently, they were unable to meet the scheduled loan payment of $125,000 owing on November 24, 1990, on the $500,000 loan from the Federal Business Development Bank. As of January 11, 1991, the defendants had other accounts payable in excess of $386,000. They have relied so far on the forbearance of their creditors to survive up to the date of this application. Moreover, at the time of the order of Teitelbaum, J., the defendants had obtained approval for a loan in the amount of $1,000,000 from the Federal Business Development Bank but the bank has refused to advance the funds due to the instant unresolved litigation and due to the security provisions in the order. They are stuck with a monthly standby fee of $2,547.94 merely to maintain access to the loan.
[10]
On the other hand, the plaintiffs argue that they themselves need all the security provided by the order under attack and that the order ought not to be lightly interfered with. They suggest that the defendants are responsible themselves for their present financial situation. During the last paving season, they undercut the plaintiffs in their bids with the result that they made very little profit and considerably reduced the plaintiffs' earnings. They knew of their cash flow problems as far back as last November, yet continued to be profligate in their operations. They advanced some $153,000 to the Summerfair Shopping Centre which is presently owing a total of about $511,000 to the defendants. In December, they incurred a $116,000 debt on the paving machine. Without any cash flow, Mr. Wiley is paying himself and his marketing manager each $5,650 per month. They are spending $4,000 per month in travel and $2,500 per month in advertising. They are maintaining two offices. They keep paying the monthly stand-by fee to the Federal Reserve Bank.
[11]
In the course of these hearings, Mr. Wiley announced that he had just sold to a Malaysian company his last paving machine for the amount of $1,960,000. The terms of the agreement, which was duly filed in court, provide that the sum of $107,000 is being paid as a nonrefundable deposit immediately. The balance of the purchase price ($1,853,000) is payable upon delivery of the equipment to the shipping agent in Vancouver which is anticipated would be completed in May 1991.
[12]
In his affidavit, Mr. Wiley also indicates that he is currently in the process of negotiating a joint venture agreement with a Malaysian company whereby they will supply training, technical and operational expertise services with respect to the paving machine: the defendants will receive 30% from these paving activities in Malaysia. Mr. Wiley anticipates that the defendants will receive from $15,000 to $20,000 per month as its share of the revenues of those operations, which may commence as early as October 1991.
[13]
One would expect this good news to have created a propitious atmosphere in which the parties involved in these proceedings would have attempted to settle their outstanding problems. Unfortunately, such is not the case. The financial and corporate divorce between the two former co-inventors has become a legal and financial struggle for the survival of the two main competitors on the same market. The legal attacks from both sides, in the British Columbia Supreme Court as well as in this court, show clearly that the parties are not in a mood to adjust their differences smoothly.
[14]
The defendants have filed a financial summary of their present situation revised as a result of the sale of the paving machine. The summary is annexed to these reasons. Their present request is that they be allowed to draw $100,000 from the $200,000 which is presently in the trust account as a result of paving revenues of last summer and they be allowed to keep all their profit from the sale of the paving machine. They submit that this would allow them to survive until October 1991 up to the date of trial.
[15]
Of course, the plaintiffs object strenuously to any variation of the order on the ground that their own interests would not be fully protected. Considerable time was expended by counsel for all parties (the three plaintiffs are represented by two different solicitors). It would be tedious as well as useless for me to report all those arguments. In essence, the plaintiffs argue that the defendants have spent too much in the past and that they ought to cut their operational expenses in the future so as to better balance their books. As to the defendants, they claim they cannot continue to operate and will not be able to keep their creditors at bay if they are not given immediate access to the sums they seek.
[16]
My duty, of course, is to ensure that justice is done and that the terms which were, in my view, properly and judiciously imposed by my colleague Teitelbaum, J., in June of last year in the expectation that this matter would be resolved by trial in October of that year, are not now too onerous and will not, in fact, dispose of the action by killing one of the combatants before the matter is disposed of by the court.
[17]
I accept the arguments of the plaintiffs that the defendants have been somewhat profligate in the past and ought to tighten their belt for the next few months. I will not, therefore, allow them to draw any amount from the trust fund.
[18]
However, it seems very likely to me that if they are not allowed full access to the profit from the recent sale of the paving equipment, they will not survive and will not have their day in court. As to the plaintiffs, they will still have, as security for the intervening period, the sum of $200,000 in trust and an equity in the defendants' Summerfair Shopping Centre, which equity is in excess of $500,000. Allowing the defendants to go into bankruptcy would not afford the plaintiffs better security. Again, we must bear in mind that the plaintiffs as yet only have an arguable case and not a judgment against the defendants.
[19]
Consequently, the order of Mr. Justice Teitelbaum, will be varied to the effect that from the recent sale of the paving machine the defendants are delivered from the obligation to pay into the defendants' solicitors' interest-bearing account 25% of gross proceeds as security.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Reginald W. Curtis/nmg
[End of document]