[1]
Russell, J.
: This is an application under section 41 of the
Access to Information Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c.A-1(
Act
) for judicial review of the refusal by the Access to Information and Privacy Office of Environment Canada (ATIP-EC) to disclose certain records in response to the Applicant's request for access under section 6 of the
Act
(Request for Access).
BACKGROUND
[2]
The Applicant, Mr. Sheldon Blank, made his Request for Access on September 5, 2001. He sought the following:
"All records not provided to me, from my prior ATIP request, being your file number A-2000-0091/lr. Also, please provide me with all new records from Garnet Murray's file from the date of my previous request on June 20, 2000 to present.
"For reference purposes I note that my prior ATIP request was for the 'File of Garnet Murray as identified in the accompanying memorandum', acknowledged received by your office on June 20, 2000."
[3]
The Applicant's "prior ATIP request" arose from the criminal prosecution of the Applicant and Gateway Industries Ltd. (a Winnipeg pulp and paper company of which the Applicant was a controlling Director) under the
Fisheries Act
, R.S.C., 1985, c. F-14 and the
Pulp and Paper Effluent Regulations
, SOR/92-269 in July 1995 (Prosecution). The Crown ultimately abandoned the Prosecution in February 2004, at which time the Applicant brought an action against the Crown for alleged fraud, conspiracy, perjury and abuse of prosecutorial powers. That action is ongoing. The Applicant seeks further access to government records for purposes of his civil law suit.
[4]
Under cover letter to the Applicant dated October 29, 2001, ATIP-EC enclosed a "complete release package," consisting of approximately 90 pages of material, in response to the Request for Access. ATIP-EC advised the Applicant that "some information has been withheld in accordance with section 23 of the
Act
," and that he could file a complaint with the Office of the Information Commissioner of Canada (OIC) if he was not satisfied with ATIP-EC's handling of the Request for Access.
[5]
By letter dated November 5, 2001, the Applicant wrote to OIC requesting that it "investigate both the inappropriate withholding of documents exempted in the October 29th release, and for neither providing nor identifying records requested by me in this file" (Complaint).
[6]
It appears that OIC did not initiate its investigation into the Complaint until October 2004. OIC explained the delay as follows in its report to the Applicant of February 15, 2005:
"While it has taken an inordinate length of time to complete this investigation - which I regret - I can assure you that your complaint was not neglected. On the contrary, it was precisely because we wanted to ensure that you received all the information you are entitled to under the
Act
. As you are aware, over the years you submitted numerous requests at various departments. Occasionally, the information sought was similar and overlapped from one request to another. In other instances, the same pages existed in more than one file."
[7]
Consultations between ATIP-EC and the Department of Justice led to the release of additional documents to the Applicant. Under cover letter to the Applicant dated January 31, 2005, ATIP-EC enclosed "additional information which can now be disclosed," and advised that "some information remains withheld in accordance with sections 14 and 23, subsection 19(1) and paragraphs 16(1)(a), 16(1)(b), 16(1) (c), 20(1)(b), 20(1)(c), 21(1)(a), 21(1)(b), and 69(1)(g) of the
Act
."
[8]
By letter dated February 15, 2005, OIC wrote to the Applicant to report the results of its investigation into the Complaint. OIC expressed its view that records were properly withheld under subsection 19(1) and paragraphs 14(b), 16(1)(a), 16(1)(b), 16(1)(c), 20(1)(b), 20(1)(c), 21(1)(a) and 21(1)(b) of the
Act
. OIC indicated that its findings on the applicability of section 69 of the
Act
would be reported separately.
[9]
OIC concluded that the Complaint was "well-founded with respect to some portions of the requested records" which were "not properly exempted under section 23 of the
Act
." On the basis of that conclusion, OIC requested the Applicant's consent to apply to this Court, pursuant to paragraph 42(1)(a) of the
Act
, for a review of ATIP-EC's refusal to release the records in question. OIC also advised the Applicant of his right to apply to the Court independently pursuant to section 41 of the
Act
.
[10]
The Applicant opted to carry the matter forward himself, and filed the present application in this Court on March 24, 2005.
[11]
Under cover letter to the Applicant dated June 1, 2005, ATIP-EC enclosed "additional information which can now be disclosed to you."
[12]
During the course of the hearing for the present application that took four days of Court time, the parties refined even further the documents and information that remain undisclosed and in dispute. The Court requested and received a modified May 31, 2006 list of outstanding documents that the Respondent still refuses to disclose. At the final day of the hearing the Respondent informed the Court that the exemption claimed for document 5863 should be 21(a) and (b) of the
Act
, and not the section 23 exemption referred to in the attached list. Following the hearing, the Court's own review of the listed documents revealed various discrepancies and problems associated with identifying a definitive list of documents in dispute. I have referred to those problems in Schedule "A" to these reasons and my own conclusions as to what remains in dispute.
[13]
The Applicant takes the view not only that the documents in this list are unlawfully withheld, but also that the Respondent has yet to disclose a complete list of documents encompassed by the Request for Access. There are also attachments, enclosures, and identifying information related to the documents withheld that the Applicant says have been exempted in their entirety and have not been identified and /or severed in accordance with section 25 of the
Act
. The Applicant also raises a variety of other arguments to nullify the exemption claimed, all of which I have attempted to address in my reasons.
[14]
Since the Court heard this matter in June, 2006, the Supreme Court of Canada has released its decision in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2006] S.C.J. No. 39. I have taken that decision into account and, in particular, I have followed the guidance of the Supreme Court with regard to the issue of litigation privilege.
ISSUE
[15]
The principal issue in this application is whether the claimed exemptions from disclosure are properly invoked. The Applicant also raises in a collateral way whether ATIP-EC has fully complied with his Request for Information.
SUBMISSIONS
The Applicant
[16]
The Applicant points out that the Respondent bears the onus of demonstrating that the claimed exemptions from disclosure were properly invoked: see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[17]
The Applicant also repeats OIC's conclusion that the Complaint was "well-founded" but he neglects to add that this was only with respect to only some portions of the requested records which were not properly exempted under section 23 of the
Act
.
[18]
With reference to the long and harrowing background to this application, the Applicant also raises a range of considerations that he says nullify reliance upon exemptions that might otherwise apply. Those considerations include such matters as waiver and the illegal and otherwise inappropriate actions of various individuals and government departments involved in the Prosecution, as well as the investigation and preparation that led to the Prosecution.
[19]
Many of the issues and arguments raised by the Applicant are complex. Unfortunately, the Applicant is not a lawyer and he represented himself throughout in the application before me. This meant that some of the points he made were not adequately supported by sufficient evidence, full argument or legal authority. The Applicant is obviously deeply resentful and suspicious of the Prosecution that was conducted against him and Gateway for many years and was then abandoned. He may be entirely right in this regard, but at this stage he appears to assume that the Court can and should merely adopt his view of the whole saga. However, as the Applicant has already been told by the Federal Court of Appeal, "in considering whether appropriate disclosure had (sic) been made under the
Act
, the Court should consider only the
Act
and the jurisprudence guiding its interpretation and application."  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at para. 14, aff'd 2006 SCC 39 (Blank Appeal A).
The Respondent
[20]
The Respondent submits that the claimed exemptions under the
Act
were properly invoked and that no further severance of information can reasonably be accomplished.
[21]
The Respondent repeats OIC's agreement with ATIP-EC's reliance on the exemptions provided for in sections 14, 16, 19, 20 and 21 of the
Act
, and with its reliance on section 23 with respect to the "majority of the information that remains withheld under this section."
[22]
The Respondent says that it cannot be held responsible for delays that have occurred during the course of the Applicant's quest for information and documents related to the Prosecution, or for the actions of other government departments and individuals involved in the long history of this matter.
[23]
The Respondent also says that the Applicant has produced no evidence to suggest wrong-doing by government officials or anything else that might vitiate the exemptions claimed for the remaining documents in dispute.
ANALYSIS
Standard of Review
[24]
As Justice Strayer explained in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Admin. L.R.(2d) 54 (T.D.), affd. (1993), 154 N.R. 319 (F.C.A.) a determination to either release or refuse to release information pursuant to a discretionary exemption in the
Act
involves two steps:
"... first, a factual determination as to whether the material comes within the description of material potentially subject to being withheld from disclosure; and second, a discretionary decision as to whether that material should nevertheless be disclosed."
[25]
The standards of review applicable in the case at bar were set out by the Federal Court of Appeal in
3430901  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  leave to appeal refused [2001] S.C.C.A. No. 537 (S.C.C.) at para. 47, (per Justice Evans):
"In reviewing the refusal of a head of a government institution to disclose a record, the Court must determine on a standard of correctness whether the record requested falls within an exemption. However, when the
Act
confers on the head of a government institution a discretion to refuse to disclose an exempted record, the lawfulness of its exercise is reviewed on the grounds normally available in administrative law for the review of administrative discretion, including unreasonableness. [...]"
[26]
Following the decision in
3430901 Canada Inc.
, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at para. 28, Justice O'Keefe applied a pragmatic and functional analysis and concluded that a decision as to whether a requested document falls within a statutory exemption should be reviewed on a standard of correctness, and the discretionary decision to refuse to disclose an exempted record should be reviewed on a standard of reasonableness simpliciter. Justice O'Keefe's decision was followed by Justice Tremblay-Lamer in the recent decision
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at para. 21.
[27]
With respect to the degree of deference to which OIC's conclusions are entitled, the Federal Court of Appeal noted in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Blank Appeal B) at para. 12 (per Justice Rothstein) as follows:
"It has been held that the considered opinion of the Information Commissioner should not be ignored by the  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), at 272 per Heald, J.A.), and that the Information Commissioner has expertise not possessed by the Court with respect to access to information (see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.) at 499 (T.D.) ..."
[28]
Justice Evans in
3430901 Canada Inc.
, above at para. 42, noted that the Court should carefully consider the Information Commissioner's reports, but also noted as follows:
"... the Court is entitled to differ from the Commissioner on questions of law, and of mixed law and fact, without having first to satisfy itself that the Commissioner's conclusion was unreasonable: the Court is charged with reviewing refusals by heads of government institutions, not the Commissioner's recommendations."
General Principles
[29]
Before embarking upon an analysis of the specific exemptions claimed under the
Act
and the objections to their applicability raised by the Applicant, there are certain general interpretive principles that have to be kept in mind.
[30]
First of all, the
Act
must be interpreted in the light of the fundamental principle that government information should be available to the public, and that exceptions to the public's right of access should be "limited and specific": see subsection 2(1) of the
Act
and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.).
[31]
Secondly, public access to government information should not be frustrated by the courts except upon the clearest of grounds. Any doubt should be resolved in favour of disclosure, with the burden of persuasion resting upon the party resisting disclosure: see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.) at p. 943 (F.C.).
[32]
Thirdly, although the
Act
creates a right of access, that right is not absolute. It must be examined in light of other provisions of the
Act
and the specific exemptions claimed: see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 191 N.R. 394.
Special Matters Raised By the Applicant
[33]
A review of the documentation withheld in this case is complicated by special considerations raised by the Applicant. He says that the Respondent cannot rely upon the claimed exemption for one or more of the following reasons:
A. Severance
The Respondent is required to comply with its severance obligations as directed by the Federal Court of Appeal in Blank Appeal A. This means that the Respondent must sever and provide general identifying information such as: the description of the document; the name, title and address of the person to whom the communication was directed; the closing words of the communication and the signature block. Justice Létourneau referred to the earlier Federal Court of Appeal decision in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  2001 FCA 374 (Blank Appeal C) at para. 23. In that decision, Justice Sharlow held this kind of information must be disclosed so that the Applicant can know "that a communication occurred between certain persons at a certain time on a certain subject, but no more." (para. 66) The Applicant says that proper severance has not occurred in this case and the Court must now review each of the documents in dispute to ensure that it does.
The Respondent points out that general identifying information should be severed and released except where to do so would reveal the privileged information.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.) and Blank Appeal A, above. The Respondent also says that severance is not reasonable where what remains of the document is meaningless or misleading because the remaining information is taken out of the context of the document as a whole.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.) and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.)
As regards the documents in dispute in this case, the Respondent says that appropriate severance has occurred and the Applicant has, in fact, received all the information he is entitled to without revealing privileged information.
The Federal Court of Appeal has already provided clear guidance on severance in Blank Appeal A, above at paras. 66-67:
"An earlier contention of the respondent that a record that is subject to solicitor-client privilege is not subject to the severance provision in section 25 has been unequivocally rejected by this Court in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (B.C.C.A.), 665, at paragraphs 65-68. The words '[n]otwithstanding any other provision of this
Act
' employed in section 25 make it a paramount section: see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (C.A.) at page 271. Therefore, general identifying information such as the description of the document, the name, title and address of the person to whom the communication was directed, the closing words of the communication and the signature block can be severed and disclosed. As this Court pointed out in
Blank
at paragraph 23, this kind of information enables the requester 'to know that a communication occurred between certain persons at a certain time on a certain subject, but no more.'
"Counsel for the respondent submits that his client has abided by these principles in this case and that the records in question have properly been severed. The appellant's argument appears to have been raised for the first time before us on appeal. If it was raised before the Motions Judge, he never dealt with it. We have no way of knowing whether severance has been effected and, if so, whether it has been effected properly. Therefore, I would send the matter back to the Federal Court for a review of the records with a view to ascertaining whether the mandatory requirements of section 25 of the
Act
have been complied with."
Following the decision of the Federal Court of Appeal, Justice Mosley considered severance in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . Justice Mosley at para. 33 relied on the reasons of Jerome A.C.J. in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  problems with surgically separating disconnected phrases that do not contain exempt information from a document:
"First, the resulting document may be meaningless or misleading as the information it contains is taken totally out of context. Second, even if not technically exempt, the remaining information may provide clues to the content of the deleted portions. Especially when dealing with personal information, in my opinion, it is preferable to delete an entire passage in order to protect the privacy of the individual rather than disclosing certain non-exempt words or phrases.
"Indeed, Parliament seems to have intended that severance of exempt and non-exempt portions be attempted only when the result is a reasonable fulfillment of the purposes of these statues [...]"
Justice Mosley concluded at paragraph 36 as follows:
"From these cases, I would derive and apply the principle that severance within a document under section 25 is only to be affected where it is reasonable to do so. Reasonableness requires that the severed information be capable of standing independently and that severance must not result in the release of meaningless words and phrases out of context or provide clues to the content of the exempted portions. Severance must be done bearing in mind the importance of impairing solicitor-client privilege as little as possible."
At paragraph 39, Justice Mosley also held as follows:
"[...] It would appear from the case law that any information, including a list of other documents, which can reasonably be severed from the privileged communication, should be severed under section 25 of the
Act
... If solicitor-client privilege is claimed for one or more of the listed documents, disclosure of the list should not compromise the privilege claimed in that document."
Justice O'Keefe also considered the issue of severance in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  and accepted the conclusions of Justice Mosley set out above.
In my view, the general principle articulated by the jurisprudence is that any non-privileged information contained in a privileged document should be severed and disclosed except to the extent that such information would be so disjointed as to be nonsensical once severed, or to the extent that the severed information would provide clues about the privileged information.
So the obligations of the Court on this issue are to examine each of documents in dispute to determine whether, in fact, full and appropriate severance has been exercised in each case in accordance with the principles set out above. That is what I have done.
b. Waiver
The Applicant is of the view that the Respondent has waived its right to claim solicitor client privilege. He says that there can be waiver by "implication," by which he appears to mean that waiver may occur even in the absence of any intention to waive the privilege. This can occur, for example, if the Respondent has taken positions which make it inconsistent to maintain the privilege. The Applicant is self-represented and he has not explained clearly in his materials or his oral presentation how waiver by implication may have occurred in the present case. I have reviewed each of the examples contained in the excerpts from Sopinka, Lederman and Bryants'
The Law of Evidence in Canada
which he filed as part of his record for this application, but I cannot connect any of the examples given with the facts as presented in the evidence before me. I have to conclude, therefore, that no adequate evidentiary or legal basis for waiver has been presented by the  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  legal advice privilege and litigation privilege. He says that litigation privilege ends with the litigation to which it relates.
The decision in Blank Appeal A was appealed to the Supreme Court of Canada, which rendered its decision on September 8, 2006 in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Blank Supreme Court Appeal). The majority decision was written by Justice Fish, who affirmed both of these principles (see paras. 4, 34).
In the present case, the Applicant says that the litigation for which the disputed documentation was prepared ended when the summary proceedings against the Applicant and his company were declared a nullity by Justice Kennedy in April, 2001, or at least in February 2004, when the Crown made its decision to stay the indictable proceedings. The Supreme Court explored the scope of litigation privilege and further affirmed at paragraph 34 the majority decision of the Federal Court of Appeal that litigation privilege continues to apply to protect information from disclosure in "related proceedings." However, Justice Fish conclusively determined at paragraph 43 that the Applicant's civil proceedings do not constitute related proceedings, but rather are separate and distinct from the criminal prosecution. For that reason, any litigation privilege attaching to the documents from the criminal prosecution expired when the criminal prosecution ended.
The Respondent's position is that the Federal Court of Appeal confirmed in Blank Appeal A, above, that the section 23 exemption applies to both legal advice privilege and litigation privilege, which, as stated above, was affirmed by the Supreme Court in the Blank Supreme Court Appeal at paragraph 4. The Respondent argues that the documents for which it claims the s. 23 exemption clearly either deal with advice provided by legal officers of the Crown or fall within the definition of litigation privilege accepted by the Court of Appeal. Given the decision of the Supreme Court in the Blank Supreme Court Appeal, this latter argument no longer needs to be considered. I have followed the Supreme Court of Canada decision on the issue of litigation privilege.
d. Piercing the Veil
The Applicant argues that solicitor-client privilege cannot be invoked for the purpose of assisting a person in the furtherance of a crime, and alleges that the Respondent either has committed, or intended to commit, actions that are criminal in nature.
The Applicant cites
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(3d) 745 for the proposition that "if a client seeks guidance from a lawyer in order to facilitate the commission of a crime or fraud, the communication will not be privileged and it is immaterial whether the lawyer is an unwitting dupe or knowing participant." The rationale for this position is that a "communication in furtherance of a criminal purpose does not occur 'in the ordinary scope of professional employ'".  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (S.C.).
The Respondent agrees that solicitor/client privilege cannot protect communications that are themselves criminal or are made with a view to obtaining legal advice to facilitate the commission of a crime. The Respondent, however, also points out that the suggestion of criminal or fraudulent activity is a serious allegation and requires an evidentiary foundation.
The Applicant has raised two concerns with respect to the Crown's conduct during the criminal prosecution. First, that the Crown unlawfully prosecuted the Applicant and his company. Second, the Crown failed to provide proper disclosure during the criminal proceedings. The Applicant has not further clarified these allegations, or presented convincing arguments on the issue of whether the Respondent's conduct was of a criminal nature.
During the Prosecution, the Applicant brought a motion for certiorari and prohibition. The Court decided that motion was premature on the basis that the Crown asserted that it was in a position to produce a minister's certificate; the Crown later acknowledged that a minister's certificate would not be available. The motion was ultimately re-heard, and the Court determined that the entire proceeding was a nullity, and that ministerial awareness was a judicial pre-requisite.
In separate proceedings, the Applicant has brought an action against the Crown alleging fraud, conspiracy, perjury and abuse of prosecutorial powers.
On the present facts, the Respondent says the Applicant has failed to establish any evidentiary basis for criminal or fraudulent conduct on the part of the various government officers involved. He has merely made allegations. In Blank Appeal A, the Federal Court of Appeal had the following to say about the criminal allegations made by the Applicant at that time at paras. 63 - 64:
"The Motions Judge reviewed the material before him and concluded that there was on these records no evidence of the criminal activity alleged by Mr. Blank against the Government of Canada officials and counsel acting on their behalf, i.e. obstruction, perjury, extortion, conspiracy, fraud or trespass. In other proceedings before the Manitoba Courts, the Manitoba Queen's Bench found no evidence of the alleged fraud: see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at paragraph 32.
"No serious evidentiary basis has been provided to us in support of the allegations of fraud and criminal activity on the part of the Government of Canada or its officials or lawyers. Therefore, there was for the Motions Judge, and there is for us, no need to review the documents subject to the privilege. However, since the Motions Judge has reviewed them and made a conclusion which is under attack, we have reviewed the records and we are satisfied that he has reached the right conclusion."
Likewise, the Applicant in this application has not provided the Court with any evidentiary basis for the criminal allegations he makes. The Court understands that he feels aggrieved by the Prosecution that was eventually abandoned after so many years and that he harbours deep suspicions about certain aspects of the investigation and prosecution process.
To the extent that this argument relates to the failure of the Respondent to provide adequate disclosure during the criminal proceedings, I note that the right to adequate disclosure is protected by section 7 of the
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedom
, Part I of the
Constitution Act, 1982
, being Schedule B of the Canada Act 1982, (U.K.), 1982, c. 11 (
Charter
) in criminal proceedings based on a defendant's right to make a full answer and defence. Inadequate disclosure may be improper, and may be a breach of a defendant's
Charter
rights, but is not specifically criminal conduct. I would also refer the Applicant to the comments of Justice Sharlow in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> :
"The disclosure right recognized in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> is critically important to persons facing a criminal trial, but it is a right that must be administered by courts having jurisdiction in criminal proceedings. To try to apply the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> rules in the context of proceedings under the
Access to Information Act
would be to invite the Information Commissioner, and ultimately this Court, to try to anticipate decisions that ought to be made, or to review decisions that have already been made, by a criminal court. In this case, for example, a Manitoba trial judge has already ruled on certain motions relating to <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> disclosures.
"I conclude that in determining whether the appropriate disclosures have been made under the
Access to Information Act
, the Court should consider only the
Act
and the jurisprudence guiding its interpretation and application. Laws requiring disclosure in other legal proceedings cannot narrow or broaden the scope of disclosure required by the
Access to Information Act
."
I have followed the guidance of Justice Sharlow in the present application.
e. Mr. Murray's Position
As well as saying that the documents in dispute should have been disclosed by the Respondent in accordance with
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  A.R. 161; 8 W.A.C. 161; 68 C.C.C.(3d) 1 as part of the Prosecution against the Applicant and his company, the Applicant raises an additional argument to avoid the consequences of Justice Sharlow's reasons referred to above. The Applicant takes particular issue with the conduct of Mr. Garnet Murray of Environment Canada who guided the investigation and gathered evidence to be used in the Prosecution. The Applicant points to various matters handled by Mr. Murray (ministerial awareness, lack of disclosure, dishonesty in dealing with the Applicant, illegally obtaining a search warrant) that he alleges were dishonest and even criminal in nature. His concern is that now, as part of the Applicant's efforts to secure disclosure under the
Act
, Mr. Murray is the one who is making the decisions as to what should be disclosed from his own files, and Mr. Murray has a vested interest in ensuring that his own conduct is not brought out into the light of day.
This is not the first time the Applicant has raised these arguments in court proceedings. As discussed by the Federal Court of Appeal in Blank Appeal A, at paragraph 14, when he appeared in the Federal Court of Appeal on the refusal by the federal information commissioner to order the release of certain documents under the control of the Minister of the Environment (in Blank Appeal C), he was told the following by the Court in its reasons:
"Subsequently, in a case involving the appellant,
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ) should now be disclosed under the
Act
. She reasserted for the Court, at paragraph 12, that in considering whether appropriate disclosure had been made under the
Act
, the Court should consider only the
Act
and the jurisprudence guiding its interpretation and application. 'Laws requiring disclosure in other legal proceedings cannot narrow or broaden the scope of disclosure required by the
Act
.'"
I do not have clear evidence before me concerning what the Applicant did or did not receive as part of the Prosecution process, or why disclosure in those proceedings was not handled as part of those proceedings. The Applicant says he was kept in the dark about what was happening during the Prosecution. However, I believe the Federal Court of Appeal has made it clear that I should consider "only the
Act
and the jurisprudence guiding its interpretation and application." (Blank Appeal A at para. 14, referring to Justice Sharlow's decision in Blank Appeal C) Likewise, as regards Mr. Murray's conduct in disclosing the contents of his own files, I have no evidence before me to suggest that he is dishonestly withholding information in order to shield his own past misconduct.
f. The Shelley Emmerson Affidavit
With respect to the affidavit of Shelley Emmerson sworn on June 2, 2005 (the Emmerson Affidavit), the Applicant asserts that it is inconsistent for the Respondent to maintain privilege in relation to documents that were not the subject of the Request for Access.
The Respondent brought a motion in writing on June 14, 2005 for an order allowing it to file the Emmerson Affidavit confidentially. There were three types of document appended to, or discussed within, the Emmerson Affidavit: communications between the Information Commissioner and the Respondent relating to the Information Commissioner's investigation; documents that the Applicant is seeking access to, which the Respondent claims are subject to solicitor-client privilege; and other records which the Applicant is seeking. The Applicant's argument appears to relate to the first type of document: communications between the Information Commissioner and the Respondent relating to the Information Commissioner's investigation.
The Respondent sought to protect these documents on the basis that section 35 of the
Act
mandates that every investigation by the Information Commissioner be conducted in private. The Respondent also relies on section 47 of the
Act
. The Applicant consented, albeit reluctantly, to the Respondent's motion on the condition that the judge hearing the present application would be able to decide whether the information contained in the Emmerson Affidavit should continue to be confidential. The Applicant also noted that at that time a decision from the Federal Court of Appeal was pending in Blank Appeal B, above, which might have some bearing on the situation.
Subsequent to the decision of Prothonotary Tabib on the Respondent's motion, the decision of the Federal Court of Appeal in Blank Appeal B was released. This dealt with applications brought by the Applicant under section 41; the Applicant was seeking disclosure of those portions of the Respondent's affidavits that were not specifically the subject matter of the section 41 applications, including documents relating to the Information Commissioner's investigation.
Justice Rothstein, writing for the Court, held that section 35 of the
Act
imposes an obligation of confidentiality on the Information Commissioner, but does not prevent the government from making its exchanges with the Information Commissioner public should it choose to do so. Noting the public interest in open court proceedings, Justice Rothstein held that the Minister may file material pertaining to the investigation by the Information Commissioner, but that section 35 will not entitle him to have that evidence treated as confidential. If the Minister wishes to have that evidence treated as confidential, section 47 and rules 151 and 152 will apply. (paras. 14-17)
Subsection 47(1) of the
Act
provides as follows:
"47(1) In any proceedings before the Court arising from an application under section 41, 42 or 44, the Court shall take every reasonable precaution, including, when appropriate, receiving representations ex parte and conducting hearings in camera, to avoid the disclosure by the Court or any person of
(a) any information or other material on the basis of which the head of a government institution would be authorized to refuse to disclose a part of a record requested under this Act; or
(b) any information as to whether a record exists where the head of a government institution, in refusing to disclose the record under this Act, does not indicate whether it exists."
"47(1) À l'occasion des procédures relatives aux recours prévus aux articles 41, 42 et 44, la Cour prend toutes les précautions possibles, notamment, si c'est indiqué, par la tenue d'audiences à huis clos et l'audition d'arguments en l'absence d'une partie, pour éviter que ne soient divulgués de par son propre fait ou celui de quiconque:
a) des renseignements qui, par leur nature, justifient, en vertu de la présente loi, un refus de communication totale ou partielle d'un document;
b) des renseignements faisant état de l'existence d'un document que le responsable d'une institution fédérale a refusé de communiquer sans indiquer s'il existait ou non."
Rule 151 provides as follows:
"151(1) On motion, the Court may order that material to be filed shall be treated as confidential.
"151(2) Before making an order under subsection (1), the court must be satisfied that the material should be treated as confidential, notwithstanding the public interest in open and accessible court proceedings."
"151(1) La Cour peut, sur requête, ordonner que des documents ou éléments matériels qui seront déposés soient considérés comme confidentiels.
"151(2) Avant de rendre une ordonnance en application du paragraphe (1), la Cour doit être convaincue de la nécessité de considérer les documents ou éléments matériels comme confidentiels, étant donné l'intérêt du public à la publicité des débats judiciaires."
Rule 152 sets out requirements for the filing of confidential material.
Justice Rothstein in Blank Appeal B at paragraph 18 stated that section 47
"[...] is intended to protect against unintended disclosure until the Court makes a substantive ruling on the question of confidentiality. As such, the section must apply not only to the record that is the subject of the section 41 or 42 application but to other material or information which, if disclosed in the course of proceedings, would disclose some or all of the contents of the record itself."
It appears, therefore, that the only material in the communications between the Information Commissioner and the Respondent which should be treated as confidential is that material which would disclose some or all of the contents of documents whose confidentiality is the subject of the present application.
As Justice Rothstein noted, an order for disclosure of this material at the time of the hearing will be too late to be useful to an applicant in pursuing his case; such an order should be made by the motions judge. It is clearly too late for the Applicant to benefit from disclosure of the communications between the Information Commissioner and the Respondent in his pursuit of the present application. Based on the application of subsection 47(1) and rule 151, however, those portions of the Emmerson Affidavit that do not disclose material that is the subject of the present application should not have been made confidential. In my view, then, that material should now be released to the Applicant.
g. Conclusions on General Objections
My conclusions on the special points raised by the Applicant in this application to defeat the exemptions relied upon by the Respondent are, generally speaking, that the Applicant has not provided the Court with a sufficient evidentiary basis that would nullify any of the exemptions claimed. The Applicant's deep sense of grievance and his suspicions, although understandable after all he has been through, cannot merely be adopted by the Court to justify setting the exemptions aside. The principal role of the Court in this application is to review the disputed documentation against the applicable exemption to make sure that the conditions for the exemption claimed exist, and to ensure that severance has been effected properly in accordance with section 25 of the
Act
. That is what I have attempted to do.
The Exemptions from Disclosure Claimed under the
Act
[34]
As can be seen from the attached Schedule of contested documents, the principle exemption invoked by the Respondent is solicitor/client privilege under section 23 of the
Act
. There is also a handful of documents that raise the exemptions available under sections 16(1)(b), 19, 20(1)(b), 21(1)(a) and 21(1)(b) of the
Act
.
[35]
OIC was of the view that all exemptions had been appropriately used (section 69 was not addressed) except for certain portions of the requested records that were not properly exempted under section 23. OIC provided its own list of the inappropriately exempted portions under section 23.
(i) Subsection 16(1)(b) - Law Enforcement and Investigations
[36]
Paragraph 16(1)(b) provides a discretionary exemption from disclosure of records containing information relating to investigative techniques or plans for specific lawful investigations and reads as follows:
"(b) information relating to investigative techniques or plans for specific lawful investigations;"
"b) contenant des renseignements relatifs à des techniques d'enquêtes ou à des projets d'enquêtes licites déterminées;"
[37]
Based on my review of the contested documents, and bearing in mind the discretionary nature of the subsection 16(1)(b), as well as OIC's assessment, I conclude that this exemption was applied correctly to all documents to which it relates.
(ii) Section 19 - Personal Information
[38]
Subsection 19(1) provides for the mandatory exemption from disclosure of records containing "personal information" / « renseignements personnels » as defined in section 3 of the
Privacy Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. P-21 (
Privacy Act
).
[39]
Subsection 3 of the
Privacy Act
defines personal information under subsection (i) as information about an identifiable individual which, where it appears with other personal information relating to the individual, or where the disclosure of the name itself would reveal information about the individual, subject to listed exceptions for purposes of section 19 of the
Act
.
[40]
Notwithstanding the above, subsection 19(2) of the
Act
provides for the discretionary disclosure of records that contain personal information, in circumstances where:
"(a) the individual to whom it relates consents to the disclosure;
"(b) the information is publicly available; or
"(c) the disclosure is in accordance with section 8 of the [
Privacy Act
.]"
"a) l'individu qu'ils concernent y consent;
"b) le public y a accès;
"c) la communication est conforme à l'article 8 de la [
Loi sur la protection des renseignements personnels
.]"
[41]
Section 8, paragraph 8(2)(m) of the
Privacy Act
independently provides for the discretionary disclosure of records containing personal information.
[42]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , Justice La Forest stated (with the approval of the majority of the Court) at paragraph 68 as follows:
"[...] I will now consider whether the information requested by the appellant constitutes personal information under s. 3 of the
Privacy Act
. In its opening paragraph, the provision states that 'personal information' means 'information about an identifiable individual that is recorded in any form including, without restricting the generality of the foregoing'. On a plain reading, this definition is undeniably expansive. Notably, it expressly states that the list of specific examples that follows the general definition is not intended to limit the scope of the former. As this Court has recently held, this phraseology indicates that the general opening words are intended to be the primary source of interpretation. The subsequent enumeration merely identifies examples of the type of subject matter encompassed by the general definition; see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at pp. 289-91. Consequently, if a government record is captured by those opening words, it does not matter that it does not fall within any of the specific examples."
[43]
Justice LaForest went on to state in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> at paragraph 86 that, in the case before him, "disclosure of the names themselves would reveal 'personal' information."
[44]
In the case at bar, OIC concluded that "the withheld information is personal to others" and that "disclosure is not authorized by subsection 19(2), there being no consent for release, no overriding public interest in disclosure, and the information is not otherwise publicly available." By its reference to the absence of an "overriding public interest in disclosure," OIC apparently considered only subparagraph 8(2)(m)(i) of the
Privacy Act
in the context of paragraph 19(2)(c) of the
Act
.
[45]
The Respondent submits that the records in question are "clearly within the definition of personal information, including instances that reveal the name(s) of an individual(s)."
[46]
Based on my review of the contested documents, and bearing in mind the broad mandatory exemption provided for in subsection 19(1), the discretion to disclose provided for in subsection 19(2), and OIC's assessment, I conclude that this exemption is correctly claimed in relation to all documents to which it relates.
(iii) Subsection 20(1)(b) - Third Party Information
[47]
Paragraph 20(1)(b) of the
Act
provides for the mandatory exemption from disclosure of records containing financial, commercial, scientific or technical information that is confidential information supplied to a government institution by a third party and is treated consistently in a confidential manner by the third party.
[48]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 306 (T.D.), Jerome, A.C.J., identified the four criteria for the application of paragraph 20(1)(b) of the
Act
: (1) the records in question must contain financial, commercial, scientific or technical information; (2) the information must be "confidential" by some objective standard (see <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , above); (3) the information must be supplied to a government institution by a third party; and (4) the information must have been treated consistently in a confidential manner by the third party.
[49]
Notwithstanding the above, subsection 20(6) - like subsection 19(2) - provides for the discretionary disclosure of records that contain information described in paragraphs 20(1)(b):
"[...] if that disclosure would be in the public interest as it relates to public health, public safety or protection of the environment and, if the public interest in disclosure clearly outweighs in importance any financial loss or gain to, prejudice to the competitive position of or interference with contractual or other negotiations of a third party."
"[...] pour des raisons d'intérêt public concernant la santé et la sécurité publiques ainsi que la protection de l'environnement; les raisons d'intérêt public doivent de plus justifier nettement les conséquences éventuelles de la communication pour un tiers: pertes ou profits financiers, atteintes à sa compétitivité ou entraves aux négociations qu'il mène en vue de contrats ou à d'autres fins."
[50]
With respect to the exemption claimed under paragraph 20(1)(b), OIC concluded that the latter three criteria identified in
Montana Band of Indians
, above, were satisfied. OIC did not comment on the character of the information, however, stating only that it "qualifies for exemption."
[51]
OIC did not address the question of discretionary disclosure under subsection 20(6).
[52]
With reference to paragraph 20(1)(b), the Respondent submits that "the information disclosed in the records at issue, on its face, demonstrates its confidential nature, such that it falls within the scope of these exemptions."
[53]
Based on my review of the contested documents, and, bearing in mind the mandatory nature of the claimed exemptions, the discretion to disclose provided for in subsection 20(6), as well as OIC's assessment, I conclude that this exemption is correctly claimed for all documents to which it relates.
(iv) Subsection 21(1) - Operations of Government
[54]
Paragraph 21(1)(a) provides for the discretionary exemption from disclosure of records containing advice or recommendations developed by or for a government institution or a minister of the Crown.
[55]
In relation to this provision, in
3430901 Canada Inc.
, above, the Federal Court of Appeal stated at paragraph 51 (per Justice Evans) as follows:
"[...] the exemption [contained in paragraph 21(1)(a)] must be interpreted in light of its purposes, namely, removing impediments to the free and frank flow of communications within government departments, and ensuring that the decision-making process is not subject to the kind of intense outside scrutiny that would undermine the ability of government to discharge its essential functions:
Canadian Council of Christian  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at paragraphs 30-32."
[56]
The following additional guidance is provided at paragraph 52:
"On the basis of these considerations, I would include within the word 'advice', an expression of opinion on policy-related matters, but exclude information of a largely factual nature, even though the verb 'advise' is sometimes used in ordinary speech in respect of a communication that is neither normative, nor in the nature of an opinion. [...]"
[57]
Paragraph 21(1)(b) provides for a discretionary exemption from disclosure of records containing an account of consultations or deliberations involving officers or employees of a government institution, a minister of the Crown or the staff of a minister of the Crown.
[58]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.T.C. 5337 (T.D.), Justice Evans provided the following guidance at paragraph 39:
"It is difficult to avoid the conclusion that the combined effect of paragraphs 21(1)(a) and (b) is to exempt from disclosure under the
Act
a very wide range of documents generated in the internal policy processes of a government institution. Documents containing information of a factual or statistical nature, or providing an explanation of the background to a current policy or legislative provision, may not fall within these broad terms. However, most internal documents that analyse a problem, starting with an initial identification of a problem, then canvassing a range of solutions, and ending with specific recommendations for change, are likely to be caught within paragraph (a) or (b) of subsection 21(1)."
[59]
In respect of the exemption claimed under subsection 21(1)(a), OIC concluded that the material in question "constitutes [...] advice or recommendations developed by or for a government institution" and that "EC officials have properly exercised the discretion contained in this paragraph." OIC concluded that the discretion contained in paragraph 21(1)(b) was also "properly exercised," as the records exempted under that provision constitute "an account of consultations or deliberations involving officers or employees of a government institution."
[60]
The Respondent submits that the contested documents are "well within the definitions set out [in paragraphs 21(1)(a) and (b)] in that they show advice being provide [sic] or received as well as an account of deliberations." The Respondent adds that the documents in dispute "quite naturally" are "often overlapped by the solicitor client privilege exemption."
[61]
Based on my review of the documents in dispute, and bearing in mind the discretionary nature of the exemptions as well as OIC's assessment, I conclude that the section 21(1) exemption is correctly applied to the documents to which it relates other than in relation to 5863 which, in my view, is not the kind of internal deliberation or policy and opinion that the cases suggest is caught by this exemption.
(v) Section 23 - Solicitor-Client Privilege and Litigation Privilege
[62]
Section 23 provides for the discretionary exemption from disclosure of records containing information that is subject to solicitor-client privilege.
[63]
As stated by the Supreme Court of Canada in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> (per Justice Major), solicitor-client privilege is "jealously guarded and should only be set aside in the most unusual circumstances, such as a genuine risk of wrongful conviction." The Supreme Court went on to note at paragraph 19 of <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> that the privilege "has been held to arise when in-house government lawyers provide legal advice to their client, a government agency: see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  O.A.C. 201 at para. 49."
[64]
In addition, as noted above, the Supreme Court in the Blank Supreme Court Appeal, at paragraph 4, has held that solicitor-client privilege in section 23 of the
Act
includes both the legal advice privilege and the litigation privilege.
[65]
Legal advice privilege is of indefinite duration: see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[66]
In the Blank Supreme Court Appeal, however, and as I have already discussed, the Supreme Court held at paragraph 34 that litigation privilege is limited in time to the duration of the proceedings that gave rise to the privilege, absent the existence of related proceedings. Justice Fish determined that the civil proceedings instituted by the Applicant do not constitute related proceedings (paragraph 43). As a result, it is my view that no litigation privilege applies to the documents withheld by the Respondent in this application.
[67]
As regards solicitor-client privilege, I note that section 23 was the only exemption in respect of which OIC described the Complaint as "well-founded." Although OIC concluded that "the majority of the information that remains withheld under this section [...] qualifies for exemption," it found that "portions of the requested records are not properly exempted under section 23 of the
Act
." In particular, OIC concluded that "section 25 of the
Act
was not properly applied to sever and disclose" portions of records claimed to be exempt under section 23.
[68]
Section 25 provides as follows:
"Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, where a request is made to a government institution for access to a record that the head of the institution is authorized to refuse to disclose under this Act by reason of information or other material contained in the record, the head of the institution shall disclose any part of the record that does not contain, and can reasonably be severed from any part that contains, any such information or material."
"Le responsable d'une institution fédérale, dans les cas où il pourrait, vu la nature des renseignements contenus dans le document demandé, s'autoriser de la présente loi pour refuser la communication du document, est cependant tenu, nonobstant les autres dispositions de la présente loi, d'en communiquer les parties dépourvues des renseignements en cause, à condition que le prélèvement de ces parties ne pose pas de problèmes sérieux."
[69]
OIC advised the Applicant in its report on the Complaint that it had recommended that ATIP-EC disclose "the general identifying information" pertaining to certain records exempted under section 23. OIC also advised that ATIP-EC "agreed to follow some but not all" of OIC's recommendations, resulting in some additional disclosure to the Applicant on January 31, 2005.
[70]
The Respondent submits that "the application of s. 23 is justified in each case."
[71]
In respect of section 25, the Respondent indicates in Exhibit 30 to its Affidavit materials where a document claimed to be exempt from disclosure under section 23 has been "disclosed in part," Exhibit 30 also provides some "general identifying information" pertaining to the contested record, albeit very little in some cases.
[72]
The Respondent submits that severance is not reasonable where what remains would be meaningless or misleading as a result of being taken out of context of the document as a whole: see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.). With respect to the documentation in question, the Respondent submits that "the Applicant has received all information that he is entitled to without revealing privileged information."
[73]
Based on my review of the contested documents, and bearing in mind the discretionary nature of the section 23 exemption, the requirement of severance in section 25, as well as OIC's negative assessment regarding "portions of the requested records," and the majority decision on the duration of litigation privilege by the Supreme Court of Canada in Blank Supreme Court Appeal, above, I conclude as follows:
a) As regards those documents for which solicitor/client advice privilege is claimed, I have concluded that the exemption has been properly applied except in relation to those documents or portions of documents set out in the order to these reasons, which should now be disclosed.
b) As regards those documents for which litigation privilege alone is claimed, I have concluded that, in light of the Supreme Court of Canada decision in
Blank
Supreme Court Appeal, above, that those documents should now be released to the Applicant if this has not already occurred.
ORDER
[74]
THIS COURT ORDERS that
1. Those portions of the Emmerson Affidavit that do not disclose material that is the subject of the present application should be released to the Applicant;
2. Those documents for which section 23 litigation privilege alone was claimed should be released to the Applicant;
3. Those documents for which an exemption other than section 23 solicitor/client privilege was claimed need not be disclosed to the Applicant except for 5863 which should be disclosed to the Applicant;
4. All documents which, during the course of this Application, the Respondent has indicated can be released to the Applicant should be released to him to the extent that this has not already occurred;
5. Those documents for which section 23 solicitor/client advice privilege was claimed need not be disclosed to the Applicant except for those documents or portions of documents referred to in Schedule B to these reasons, which documents or portions should now be disclosed to the Applicant.
6. The parties are at liberty to address the Court on the issue of costs.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/vnh
Schedule "A"
Documents in Dispute
There are several discrepancies between the documents listed in the Applicant's letter of May 26, 2006 and the Respondent's list of May 31, 2006.
There are currently four documents that appear in the Applicant's letter that do not appear on the Respondent's list:
2015
In a letter to the Court dated February 28, 2006, counsel for the Respondent indicated that pages 2015-2022 were duplicates of pages 392-1 - 399-1
2244-2247
-
3009
-
5868
In the February 28, 2006 letter, counsel for the Respondent indicated that this document had either previously been released, or could be released to Mr. Blank.
All of these documents appear in the original list of documents attached to the affidavit of Shelley Emerson. I cannot find any correspondence in the file to indicate that either the document at pages 2244-2247, or the document at page 3009 should be removed from the review. I have included these documents in the list, but have marked them with bold-faced type.
There are also a number of documents that appear in the Respondent's list of documents under dispute which are not listed in the Applicant's letter. I have removed these documents from the list:
896-1
This document is a duplicate of 431-1, which the Applicant listed in his letter
772
This document is apparently "referred to at 724", 724 is listed in the Applicant's letter
2224
-
3909
-
4204
-
4888-4897
-
There were a number of documents listed in the Applicant's letter of May 26, 2006, which the Respondent indicated in its letter of May 31, 2006, it is willing to release to the Applicant. I have removed these documents from the list:
95-1 - 96-1, 430-1, 588-1, 904-1, 905-1 - 906-1, 365, 366, 487, 1312, 2235, 2600, 2601-2602, 2721, 2732, 2733, 2736, 3734-3736, 3755-3756, 3925, 3926, 4140, 4202, 4749, 4750, 5672-5673, 5841, 5849-5850, 5851, 5852, 5854, 5859, 5862, 6274.
The Respondent also indicated that pages noted as "newly released" by the Applicant have now been provided to him. I have removed all of these documents from the list of documents in dispute.
Master List of Documents that Remain in Dispute
The rest of the documents are listed in both the Applicant's letter, and the Respondent's list.
I have listed duplicates together rather than repeating them in the list.
Where the Respondent simply claimed general solicitor-client privilege rather than litigation privilege or solicitor-client privilege and litigation privilege, I have simply listed the claimed exemption as section 23. However, I have specifically indicated where the Respondent claims litigation privilege.
Document
Duplicates
Exemption Section
Rationale
2
-
23
Communication with counsel
63-64
4173-4174; 6063; 6064-6065
23
Communication with counsel
359-1
-
23
Communication with counsel
383-1 - 386-1
387-1 - 390-1; 5944-5946
23
Communication with counsel
391-1
2014
23
Communication with counsel
392-1 - 399-1
2016-2022
23
Communication with counsel
401-1 - 402-1
1764-1765
23
Communication with counsel
408-1
-
23
Communication with counsel
425-1-426-1
-
23
Communication with counsel
433-1 - 434-1
898-1 - 899-1; 2122-2123; 3498-3499
23
Communication with counsel
435-1 - 436-1
442-1 - 443-1; 444-1 - 445-1; 495-1 - 496-1; 900-1 - 901-1; 2124; 3500-3501
23
Communication with counsel
437-1 -  438-1
2126 - 2127; 3502 - 3503
23
Communication with counsel
440-1 - 444-1
-
23
Communication with counsel
448-1
-
23
Communication with counsel
451-1 - 452-1
-
23
Communication with counsel
459-1 - 462-1
-
23
Communication with counsel
463-1
-
23
Communication with counsel
467-1 - 469-1
-
23 (litigation & advice)
Excerpt of draft information to obtain search warrant; hand-written notes are comments passing between counsel and client and are subject to solicitor-client privilege
472-1 - 483-1
2069 - 2070; 3444-3445
23
Communication with counsel
474-1 - 489-1
2071 - 2087
23 (litigation & advice)
Excerpt of draft information to obtain search warrant; hand-written notes are comments passing between counsel and client and are subject to solicitor-client privilege
490-1
-
23
Communication with counsel
491-1
-
23
Communication with counsel
492-1 - 493-1
-
23
Communication with counsel
497-1
-
23
Communication with counsel
498-1
-
23
Communication with counsel
499-1
-
23
Communication with counsel
500-1 - 502-1
-
23
E-mail discussion re: information requested by Crown counsel
503-1
-
23
Communication with counsel
504-1
-
23
Communication with counsel
508-1
-
23
Communication with counsel
509-1 - 512-1
-
23 (litigation & advice)
Draft affidavit; hand-written notes are comments passing between counsel and client and are subject to solicitor-client privilege
513-1 - 514-1
-
23
Communication with counsel
571-1 - 573-1
-
23
Communication with counsel
574-1 - 575-1
-
23
Communication with counsel
589-1
-
23
Communication with counsel
692-1
2341
23
Communication with counsel
886-1 - 895-1
-
23
Excerpt of brief prepared for Crown counsel
902-1 - 903-1
-
23
Communication with counsel
541
-
23
Communication with counsel
724
5351
34
Communication with counsel
811 - 834
-
23 (litigation)
Excerpt of draft search warrant / information to obtain search warrant
836
-
23
Communication with counsel
837 - 839
-
23 (litigation)
Excerpt of draft search warrant / information to obtain search warrant
840
841
23
Communication with counsel
842 - 843
-
23
Repeats legal advice obtained from Crown counsel
844
-
23
Communication with counsel
845 - 862
-
23 (litigation & advice)
Excerpt of draft information to obtain search warrant; hand-written notes are comments passing between counsel and client and are subject to solicitor-client privilege
863 - 866
-
23 (litigation)
Excerpt of draft information to obtain search warrant
867
4898
23
Communication with counsel
868 - 878
-
23 (litigation & advice)
Excerpt of draft search warrant / information to obtain search warrant
880 - 889
-
23 (litigation & advice)
Excerpt of draft information to obtain search warrant; hand-written notes are comments passing between counsel and client and are subject to solicitor-client privilege
890
-
23
Notes of telephone conversation with counsel
891
-
23
Communication with counsel
892 - 893
-
23 (litigation & advice)
Excerpt of draft information to obtain search warrant; hand-written notes are comments passing between counsel and client and are subject to solicitor-client privilege
896
4882
23
Repeats subject matter of material sent to counsel
897
-
23
Communication with counsel
898 - 919
-
23 (litigation & advice)
Excerpt of draft information to obtain search warrant; hand-written notes are comments passing between counsel and client and are subject to solicitor-client privilege
927
-
23
Communication with counsel
935 - 949
-
16(1)(b), 19
Document discloses manner in which investigation was carried out. Document contains personal information.
950
-
16(1)(b)
Document discloses manner in which investigation was carried out.
952
-
16(1)(b), 19
Document discloses manner in which investigation was carried out.
953 - 959
-
16(1)(b), 19
Document discloses manner in which investigation was carried out.
1251 - 1252
1259 - 1260
23
Communication with counsel
1254
-
23
Communication with counsel
1263
1266
-
Communication with counsel
1272
1273
23
Communication with counsel
1281 - 1283
-
23
Comments prepared for counsel
1284
-
23
Comments prepared for counsel
1295
-
23
Communication with counsel
1296
-
23
Communication with counsel
1297 - 1298
-
23
Communication with counsel
1299
-
23
Communication with counsel
1314
-
23
Communication with counsel
1216
-
23
Communication with counsel
1318
-
23
Communication with counsel
1320
-
23
Communication with counsel
1325
-
23
Communication with counsel
1334 - 1335
-
23
Communication with counsel
1378
-
23
Communication with counsel
1823 - 1827
-
23
Comments prepared for counsel
1828
-
23
Communication with counsel
1829 - 2837
-
23 (litigation & advice)
Draft affidavit; hand-written notes are comments passing between counsel and client and are subject to solicitor-client privilege
1840 - 1843
-
23
Comments respecting affidavit prepared for counsel
1844
-
19
Personal information
1899
-
23
Communication with counsel
1900
-
23
Communication with counsel
2013
-
23
Communication with counsel
2015
-
-
Appears in Applicant's letter, but not Respondent's list. In a letter to the Court dated February 28, 2006, counsel for the Respondent indicated that pages 2015 - 2022 were duplicates of pages 392-1 - 399-1
2023
3393
23
Communication with counsel
2040
-
23
Communication with counsel
2063
3425; 3436
23
Communication with counsel
2089 - 2111
3464 - 3486
23 (litigation)
Excerpt of draft information to obtain search warrant
2112
3487
23
Communication with counsel
2114
3489
23
E-mail from counsel (see page 2113)
2116
3491
23
Communication with counsel
2117 - 2118
3492 - 3493
23
Communication with counsel
2128
3504
23
Communication with counsel
2134
-
23
Excerpt of brief prepared for Crown counsel; repeats legal advice received
2136
34
23
Excerpt of brief prepared for Crown counsel
2138
-
23
Excerpt of brief prepared for Crown counsel
2142
-
23
Excerpt of brief prepared for Crown counsel
2186
3524
23
Excerpt of brief prepared for Crown counsel
2207
3545
23
Excerpt of brief prepared for Crown counsel
2209 - 2217
3547 - 3555
23
Excerpt of brief prepared for Crown counsel
2241 - 2243
-
23
Communication with counsel
2244 - 2247
-
-
Appears in Applicant's letter, but not on Respondent's list. I cannot find any reason for its removal from the list of documents under dispute.
2249
-
23
Comments provided for counsel
2255
-
23
Comments provided for counsel
2260
-
23
Communication with counsel
2350 - 2356
-
23
Comments/list provided for counsel
2373
2384
23
Communication with counsel
2388
-
23 (litigation)
Hand-written notes on document are working notes of counsel
2389
-
23 (litigation)
Hand-written notes on document are working notes of counsel
2391
-
23 (litigation)
Hand-written notes on document are working notes of counsel
2394
-
23 (litigation)
Hand-written notes on document are working notes of counsel
2395
-
23 (litigation)
Hand-written notes on document are working notes of counsel
2425
-
23
Communication with counsel
2598
-
23
Communication with counsel
2599
-
23
Communication with counsel
2606 - 2607
-
23
Communication with counsel
2646 - 2647
-
23
Communication with counsel
2878
4731
20(1)(b)
Financial information of third party
2879
4732
19
Personal information
2881
4734
21(1)(b)
Advice given/deliberations made within government department
2883
4736
21(1)(b)
Advice given/deliberations made within government department
3009
-
23
Appears in Applicant's letter, but not on Respondent's list. I cannot find any reason for its removal from the list of documents under dispute.
3021
-
23
Communication with counsel
3022 - 3026
-
23
Comments/list provided for counsel
3099
-
19
Personal information
3353 - 3354
-
23
Document repeats communication/advice from counsel
3357
-
23
Communication with counsel
3410
-
23
Communication with counsel
3446 3462
-
23 (litigation & advice)
Excerpt of draft search warrant/information to obtain search warrant; hand-written notes are comments passing between counsel and client and are subject to solicitor-client privilege
3734
-
23
Communication with counsel
3892
-
23
Communication with counsel
3893 - 3898
-
23
Chronology prepared for counsel
3905
-
23
Communication with counsel
3907
-
23
Communication with counsel
3911
-
23
Communication with counsel
3918
-
23
Communication with counsel
3927
-
23
Communication with/post-it note for counsel
3947
-
23
Communication with counsel
3948 - 3950
-
23 (litigation)
Communications with third party for purpose of litigation ; section 16(1)(c) no longer applies to this document
3951
-
23 (litigation)
Communications with third party for purpose of litigation ; section 16(1)(c) no longer applies to this document
3952
-
23 (litigation)
Communications with third party for purpose of litigation ; section 16(1)(c) no longer applies to this document
3977 - 3979
-
23 (litigation)
Hand-written notes of counsel on document
4160
-
23
Draft affidavit
4161 - 4164
-
23 (litigation & advice)
Draft affidavit; hand-written notes are comments passing between counsel and client and are subject to solicitor-client privilege
4167 - 4168
-
23
Communication with counsel
4169 - 4171
-
23
Information /list prepared for counsel
4706
-
20(1)(b)
Scientific/Technical information of third party
4821
-
23
Communication with counsel
4822 - 4823
-
23 (litigation), 19
Draft witness list prepared by counsel; also contains personal information
4847 - 4848
-
23
Communication with counsel
4856
-
23 (litigation)
Cover page to excerpt of draft information to obtain search warrant
4857 - 4877, 4878
-
23 (litigation & advice)
Excerpt of draft search warrant/information to obtain search warrant; hand-written notes are comments passing between counsel and client and are subject to solicitor-client privilege
4883 (related to draft warrant)
-
23
Communication with counsel
4884 - 4885 (related to draft warrant)
-
23 (litigation & advice)
Excerpt of draft search warrant/information to obtain search warrant; hand-written notes are comments passing between counsel and client and are subject to solicitor-client privilege
4886
-
23
Communication with counsel
4887
-
23
Notes of telephone conversation with counsel
4899 - 4912
-
23 (litigation & advice)
Excerpt of draft search warrant/information to obtain search warrant; hand-written notes are comments passing between counsel and client and are subject to solicitor-client privilege
4914
-
23
Communication with counsel - related to draft warrants
4915 - 4932
-
23 (litigation & advice)
Excerpt of draft search warrant/information to obtain search warrant; hand-written notes are comments passing between counsel and client and are subject to solicitor-client privilege - related to draft warrants
4933
-
23 (litigation)
Draft search warrant cover page
4934 - 4940
-
23 (litigation)
Excerpt of draft search warrant/information to obtain search warrant
4942
-
23
Communication with counsel
4943 - 4945
-
23 (litigation)
Excerpt of draft search warrant/information to obtain search warrant
4946
-
23 (litigation)
Draft search warrant cover page
4947 - 4963
-
23 (litigation)
Excerpt of draft search warrant/information to obtain search warrant
4964 - 4965
-
23
Communication with counsel
5086
-
23
Communication with counsel
5092 - 5094
-
23
Communication with counsel
5216
5217; 5218; 5219
23
Communication with counsel
5231
-
23
Communication with counsel
5232
-
23
Communication with counsel
5243
-
23
Communication with counsel
5275
-
23
Communication with counsel
5335
-
23
Communication with counsel
5350
-
23
Document repeats information requested by counsel
5613
-
23
Communication with counsel
5618
-
23
Communication with counsel
5654
-
23
Communication with counsel
5685
-
23
Communication with counsel
5693
-
23
Communication with counsel
5694
-
23
Communication with counsel
5704
5711
23
Communication with counsel
5712 - 5717
-
23 (litigation)
Draft list of documents for production
5830
5831
23
Notes of telephone conversation with counsel
5842 - 5843
-
23
Communication with counsel
5846
-
23
Communication with counsel
5847
5858
23
Communication with counsel
5855 - 5856
Listed as a duplicate of 5849-5850, but those pages are not currently listed as being in dispute by either party.
23
Communication with counsel
5863
-
21(1)(a)(b)
Comments respecting draft wording of document
5864
-
23 (litigation & advice)
Draft certificate; hand-written notes are comments passing between counsel and client and are subject to solicitor-client privilege
5865
5866 duplicate
23
Communication with counsel
5866 - 5867
-
23
Communication with counsel
5868
-
-
Appears in Applicant's letter but not on Respondent's list. In the February 28, 2006 letter, counsel for the Respondent indicated that this document had either previously been released, or could be released to Mr. Blank.
5871
-
23
Communication with counsel
5888
-
23
Communication with paralegal
5914
-
21(1)(a), 21(1)(b)
Advise given/deliberations made within government department
5915
-
23
Communication with counsel
5941
5942 duplicate
23
Communication with counsel
5942 - 5943
-
23
Communication with counsel
5947 - 5948
-
23
Excerpt of brief prepared for Crown counsel
5949
-
21(1)(a), 21(1)(b)
Advise given/deliberations made within government department
5964
-
23
Communication with counsel
6058
-
23
Communication with counsel
6273
-
23
Communication with counsel
Schedule "B"
Document Number
Disclosure Requirement
426-1
The closing words (i.e. the final line before the signature block) should be disclosed.
436-1
The final two lines (beginning "If you wish ...") immediately before the signature block should be disclosed.
438-1
The final two lines (beginning "I would appreciate ...") immediately before the signature block should be disclosed.
467-1 to 469-1
These documents should be disclosed. The main exemption was litigation privilege, which has ended. Hand-written notes may be redacted by the Minister.
474-1 to 489-1
These documents should be disclosed. The main exemption was litigation privilege, which has ended. Hand-written notes may be redacted.
493-1
The final two lines (beginning "If you wish ...") immediately before the signature block should be disclosed.
500-1 to 504-1
These documents should be disclosed. They do not appear to be communication with counsel.
509-1 to 512-1
This document should be disclosed. Litigation privilege has ended. The Minister may redact the hand-written notes.
692-1
The final line before the signature block (beginning "I look forward ...") should be disclosed.
903-1
The final two lines before the signature block (beginning "I would appreciate ...") should be disclosed.
811 to 834
These documents should all be disclosed. Litigation privilege has ended.
836-1
The final paragraph before the signature block should be disclosed.
837 to 839
These documents should be disclosed. Litigation privilege has ended.
842 to 843
These documents should be disclosed. Litigation privilege has ended.
845 to 866
These documents should be disclosed. Litigation privilege has ended. These documents should be disclosed. Litigation privilege has ended. Hand-written notes may be redacted.
868 to 878
These documents should be disclosed. Litigation privileges ended. Hand-written notes may be redacted.
880 to 889
These documents should be disclosed. Litigation privilege ended. Hand-written notes may be redacted.
892 to 893
These documents should be disclosed. Litigation privilege has ended. Hand-written notes may be redacted.
896
This document should be disclosed. It does not appear to be a communication with counsel.
898 to 919
These documents should be disclosed. Litigation privilege has ended. Hand-written notes may be redacted.
1829 to 1837
These documents should be disclosed. Litigation privilege has ended. Hand-written notes may be redacted.
2089 to 2111
These documents should now be disclosed. Litigation privilege has ended.
2117
The final paragraph before the signature block (beginning "If you require ...") should be disclosed.
2244 to 2247
These documents should be disclosed. There is no clear indication that solicitor/client privilege should apply or that it was part of a communication with a solicitor.
2.3882389239e+19
The notations should now be disclosed. Litigation privilege has ended.
3410
This should be disclosed. There is no clear indication that communication with counsel was involved.
3446, 3447 to 3462
These documents should be disclosed. The main privilege is litigation privilege and this has ended. Hand-written notes may be redacted.
3948 to 3950
These documents should be disclosed. Litigation privilege has ended.
3951, 3952, 3977 to 3979
These documents should be disclosed. Litigation privilege has ended.
4161 to 4164
These documents should be disclosed. Litigation privilege has ended. Hand-written notes may be redacted.
4167
The subject heading should be disclosed.
4856 to 4878
These documents should be disclosed. Litigation privilege has ended. Hand-written notes may be redacted.
4884 to 4885
These documents should be disclosed. Litigation privilege has ended. Hand-written notes may be redacted.
4899 to 4912
These documents should be disclosed. Litigation privilege has ended. Hand-written notes may be redacted.
4915 to 4932
These documents should be disclosed. Litigation privilege has ended. Hand-written notes may be redacted.
4933 to 4940
These documents should be disclosed. Litigation privilege has ended.
4942
The final paragraph (beginning "If additional information ...") should be disclosed.
4943 to 4945
These documents should be disclosed. Litigation privilege has ended.
4946 to 4963
These documents should be disclosed. Litigation privilege has ended.
5432 to 5433
This document, as well as 5420 and 5438 should be disclosed. Litigation privilege does not apply.
5712 to 5717
This document should be released. Litigation privilege does not apply.
5863 to 5864
These documents should be disclosed. Litigation privilege does not apply. Hand-written notes may be redacted. Section 21(1)(a)(b) does not apply.
5941 to 5943
The final paragraph on 5943 immediately before the signature block (beginning "If you have any questions ...") should be disclosed.
6058
The final line immediately before the signature block (beginning "Your earliest response ...") should be disclosed.
[End of document]