[1]
Denault, J.
: This is an application for judicial review of a decision of an immigration officer refusing Ms. Pillay's application for permanent residence from within Canada. The ground for this application is that the immigration officer erred in law in refusing the application. The applicant seeks to have the immigration officer's decision set aside and an order requiring the respondent to grant the applicant's request for landing on humanitarian and compassionate grounds.
Facts:
[2]
The applicant is a Hindu Tamil and a citizen of South Africa. The applicant arrived in Canada on February 2, 1990, and married Marlon Pather, a permanent resident, on February 16. Mr. Pather signed an undertaking of assistance in regards to the applicant and on December 6, 1990, a special authorization was issued by Order-in-Council permitting the applicant to apply for landing from within Canada.
[3]
On April 2, 1991, the applicant's aunt, Ms. Yougambal Moodley, informed immigration officials that the marriage between the applicant and Mr. Pather was one of convenience and an investigation was initiated. Two immigration investigators went to the couple's last known address and were informed by Mr. Pather's parents that the couple had moved and that they were experiencing some marital difficulties. The investigators then went to the couple's new residence and interviewed them separately. They were then interviewed separately at the CIC by Mr. Robert Thorpe, an immigration officer.
[4]
On July 15, Ms. Moodley contacted Mr. Thorpe's supervisor, Ms. Ava Muir, and indicated that she had evidence that the marriage was one of convenience. Ms. Moodley and her daughter met with Ms. Muir and provided a series of letters which Ms. Pillay had written to the daughter. In these letters Ms. Pillay indicated that she wanted assistance in getting into Canada by way of a fraudulent employment guarantee of fiance (she later indicated that she was refused a landing application from abroad) and she made many negative comments about Mr. Pather and his family.
[5]
On the basis of the above, Mr. Thorpe and Ms. Muir decided to call the couple in for another interview on July 22. During his interview with Mr. Thorpe, Mr. Pather signed a statutory declaration indicating a withdrawal of his undertaking of assistance, that the marriage was one of convenience, and that the declaration was not obtained by coercion. Following her interview with Mr. Thorpe, Ms. Pillay was interviewed by Ms. Ava Muir. Ms. Pillay then signed a statutory declaration indicating that the marriage had never been consummated, that the marriage was one of convenience, and that she intended to depart voluntarily.
[6]
On October 4, 1991, Ms. Pillay attended an interview to consider humanitarian and compassionate grounds pursuant to s. 114(2). On January 7, 1992, Ms. Pillay received a letter dated December 11, 1991, informing her that her application for permanent residence was refused.
Issues:
[7]
At issue is the decision contained in this letter from Mr. K. Lawrence, Manager of the CIC, to Ms. Pillay. The relevant part of the letter reads as follows:
"... you entered into marriage with Marlon Pather primarily for the purpose of gaining admission to Canada as a member of the family class and not with the intention of residing permanently with your spouse.
Some of the more significant factors which led me to form this opinion are as follows:
- it has been established that you do not cohabit with your sponsor as husband and wife.
- you have both stated that you have never consummated your marriage.
- it has been established that on 22 July 1991 your husband withdrew his Undertaking of Assistance on your behalf."
[8]
The following are the issues to be resolved:
(1) Whether the immigration officer erred in law in refusing the application for permanent residence following the issuance of the special authorization;
(2) Whether the immigration officer erred in law by arriving at conclusions based on admissions which were involuntary and made under duress;
(3) Whether the immigration officials violated s. 7 of the
Charter of Rights and Freedoms
; and
(4) Whether the immigration officer dealt with the application for permanent residence in a biased manner.
Applicant's Submissions:
[9]
The applicant submits that the immigration officers acted outside their jurisdiction in reviewing the bona fides of the marriage between Ms. Pillay and Mr. Pather after a special authorization was issued. Immigration Guidelines, I.E. 9.18(3)(a) and (b) provide that immigration officers may refuse landing after a special authorization is issued if the applicant is inadmissible, including if the applicant is in contravention of s. 19(1)(d) of the
Immigration Act
on the basis that the marriage meets the test set out in s. 4(3) of the
Immigration Regulations
. The applicant maintains that the guideline is ultra vires on the basis that the special authorization grants an automatic right to permanent residency.
[10]
Secondly, the applicant maintains that the rules of natural justice were not applied to the decision in this case and/or that the statements and the statutory declarations of July 22 were obtained through duress. It is alleged that Mr. Thorpe and Ms. Muir threatened the applicant with deportation and prosecution unless she signed the declaration, that Mr. Thorpe made accusations about Ms. Pillay and their relationship to Mr. Pather, and that he threatened him and his family with prosecution if he did not sign the declaration. In view of these allegations, the applicant submits that the declarations should be considered involuntary and inadmissible as evidence against the applicant.
[11]
Thirdly, it is submitted that the duress exerted by the immigration officials entailed a violation of the applicant's rights under s. 7 of the
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
.
[12]
Finally, it is suggested that there was a reasonable apprehension of bias on the part of the immigration official. The submission is based upon an alleged comment by the official, "Don't waste my time because I will call the R.C.M.P. and they will charge you" and notes by the official which state "Informant states that sponsor - Marlin [sic] is likely to break down - he is afraid of deportation. Might get stat.dec."
Respondent's Submissions:
[13]
The respondent submits that the immigration officer did not act outside of his jurisdiction in refusing the application for landing on the basis of s. 19(1)(d) of the
Immigration Act
and s. 4(3) of the
Immigration Regulations
. It is their submission that a special authorization does not, on its face, purport to grant landing or permanent residence and that no final assessment had been made of the applicant's request for permanent residence prior to the issuance of the special authorization.
[14]
In addition, the respondent maintains that no threats or coercion were used against the applicant and her husband, that they were not deprived of the opportunity to make an informed and independent decision, and that their rights under s. 7 of the
Charter
were not violated. In support of this submission they rely on the evidence of Mr. Thorpe and Ms. Muir that they followed standard procedure in their interviews, that they informed the couple of their rights, and that regarding Mr. Pather no action could be taken against him, that they informed them of the significance of their statutory declarations and that they asked whether they understood and agreed with the statements contained therein. In addition, Mr. Pather's declaration contains express recognition of the fact that no action would be taken against him and that the declaration was not obtained by coercion.
[15]
Finally, it was submitted that the immigration officer acted impartially and that he did not make a decision on the applicant's request for permanent residence in a biased manner. The proper test to apply is that set out in
Committee for Justice and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.): would an informed person, viewing the matter realistically and practically and having thought the matter through, think it more likely than not that the decision-maker would unconsciously or consciously decide an issue unfairly.
Analysis:
[16]
The first issue raised by the applicant is an important one as it deals with the effect of special authorizations exempting applicants from the requirements of s. 9(1) such that applications for permanent residency should be filed from abroad. The cases cited by the applicant provide a clear statement that the issuance of a special authorization granted the right to be landed on the basis that the applicant met all the requirements in the
Act
when the application for exemption was complete. A subsequent withdrawal of undertakings for support had no effect because the applicant had already been determined to meet the necessary requirements: (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R. 37 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.)).
[17]
However, in a more recent decision of this court,
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), Madame Justice Reed states at p. 6:
"It is clear, in my view, that an Order-in-Council exempting an individual from the visa requirements of s. 9(1) does not confer a right to permanent residence on the applicant. The exemption's effect is to allow the making of an application for landing despite the fact that the applicant is already within Canada."
Madame Justice Reed distinguishes the above cases and another,
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  exemption in these cases indicated that the applicant met all the requirements of the
Act
and/or that the application for landing had already been considered and decided. The facts in her case indicated otherwise: that no final determination on the merits of the application for landing had been made prior to the issuance of the special authorization. She states at p. 10:
"As I understand it, the Department of Immigration, after the decisions in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> and
Dawson
, changed its practice. Instead of the [sic] determining an application on its merits in anticipation of a s. 9(1) waiver being given, the practice was adopted of indicating only that the applicant might fulfil the requirements of the
Act
."
[18]
During the hearing, counsel referred me to an even more recent decision of this court,
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  meet requirements" on the request for special authorization
"leaves it open to the Department to verify the accuracy of information provided by an applicant, or to determine the bona fides of a marriage before confirming conclusively that all requirements had been met ... These are matters of inaccuracies of past facts or assumptions about a state of circumstances that existed at the time when, and upon which, the Department made its request and recommendation for an Order-in-Council."
In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , it is not the bona fides of the marriage which was in dispute but the effect of four criminal convictions obtained subsequent to the issuance of the Order-in-Council. Rothstein, J., was of the opinion that these convictions are analogous to the subsequent sponsorship withdrawals in
Dawson
and <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> and that they should not affect the issuance of landing documents.
[19]
In this case, the request for an Order-in-Council states that the applicant "may meet other requirements of the
Act
and
Regulations
". This is analogous to the situation in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , and, in my opinion, Madame Justice Reed's reasoning in that case presents the correct view of the operation of ss. 9(1) and 114(2) when the bona fides of the marriage is at issue.
[20]
Counsel for the applicant argued that emphasis should be placed on the word "other" in the comment, such that the request for an Order-in-Council indicated that the applicant met the requirements regarding the bona fides of the marriage but that other requirements of the
Act
and
Regulations
had not yet been considered. However, I am in agreement with counsel for the respondent that the operative word in this comment is "may"; that the request was for an exemption from the requirement in s. 9(1), that the request was not a final determination of the application for landing, and that the applicant "may meet other requirements" only once they are properly assessed.
[21]
Counsel for the applicant also argued that the above reasoning meant that the spousal sponsorship was open to withdrawal for an indefinite period of time causing considerable uncertainty for applicants. This was the concern of Teitelbaum, J., in
Dawson
, supra, at page 50:
"If there is no limit on the time that the respondent can take to decide, after a subs. 9(1) exemption has been obtained and the applicant has fulfilled the
Act's
criteria, any spouse can threaten, for whatever reason, the withdrawal of sponsorship thus making 'life' impossible for the other spouse."
However, that is not the situation in this case. In
Dawson
, the application was considered on the basis that the applicant was an independent, not a member of the family class, because of the sponsorship withdrawal. In the situation before me, the immigration officer denied the application for permanent residence because it was his opinion that the marriage was entered into for immigration purposes contrary to s. 4(3) of the
Regulations
and that Ms. Pillay was inadmissible pursuant to paragraph 19(2)(d) of the
Act
. Mr. Pather's sponsorship withdrawal was only one of the factors in support of this determination and not, as in
Dawson
, the reason for refusing the application. The issuance of the Order-in-Council does not purport to prevent the application of s. 4(3) of the
Regulations
and paragraph 19(2)(d) of the
Act
. In my opinion, until a final determination is made on whether the applicant meets the requirements for landing, the applicant is susceptible to an investigation of the bona fides of the marriage. Therefore, the immigration official acted within his jurisdiction in reviewing the application for landing after the special authorization was issued and after the undertaking of assistance was purportedly withdrawn.
[22]
Regarding the admissibility of the statutory declarations and other statements made by the couple on July 22, I am not convinced that a close examination of the evidence reveals that they were obtained under duress or as a result of coercion. In their affidavits Mr. Thorpe and Ms. Muir suggest that standard procedures were followed and that the applicant and her husband were aware of their rights and the implications of their decisions at all times. However, the affidavits of Ms. Pillay and Mr. Pather suggest otherwise. They allege that they were manipulated by the presentation of the letters and the threat of deportation and/or prosecution, and that they were essentially badgered into signing the statements. In my opinion, the submissions of the immigration officer are convincing in that they provide a detailed description of what transpired and are supported by interview notes and the signed statutory declarations. The issue of the
Charter
violation may be disposed on the same basis; there was no violation of s. 7.
[23]
I would agree with the respondent's submissions regarding the test for determining apprehension of bias. In my opinion, the evidence reveals that an informed person, viewing the matter realistically and practically and having thought the matter through, would think it more likely than not that the immigration officer would decide the matter fairly. In the present case, when the interviews took place there was evidence of a marriage of convenience but the applicant was given an opportunity to respond to the allegations. I see no reasonable apprehension of bias.
Conclusion:
[24]
An examination of the evidence demonstrates that this is a situation of a nonbona fide marriage and that the decision of the immigration officer was reasonable. For these reasons the application is dismissed.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Eric B. Appleby/nmg
[End of document]