[1]
Cullen, J.
: This is an application for judicial review, pursuant to leave granted by the Associate Chief Justice, of a decision of the Appeal Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board ("the Appeal Division"), dated September 13, 1993 and signed September 27, 1993, in which it dismissed the applicant's appeal from a deportation order made by Adjudicator G.R. McBrien on March 13, 1992. The Associate Chief Justice also stayed the removal of the applicant until this judicial review is heard and determined.
Facts
[2]
The applicant was born in Jamaica on August 5, 1970. He is a citizen of Jamaica. His father is a Canadian citizen and sponsored the applicant's and his brother's applications for landing in Canada. The applicant and his brother came to Canada and were landed on December 12, 1986.
[3]
The applicant attended high school in Scarborough, Ontario until 1988, taking courses at the grade 11 and 12 level. Upon leaving school, the applicant worked at a number of jobs. The applicant formed a common law union with Sandra Pryce in 1989. There are two children of this union: Junior Cherrington, born July 7, 1990, and Antonio Cherrington, born August 3, 1993.
[4]
On October 21, 1990, the applicant and an accomplice robbed a Swiss Chalet Restaurant. The applicant was subsequently arrested for armed robbery; he pleaded guilty. The applicant was represented by counsel at his preliminary hearing on the criminal charge and during sentencing. The applicant, in his affidavit, presents "his side of the story" about the events leading up to and during the robbery. The applicant's account denies that he carried a weapon. Counsel for the respondent strenuously objects to the applicant's version, relying on the agreed facts which were incorporated into the sentencing report. Although I note that the applicant disagrees with the sentencing report version, I am setting it out nonetheless. On Sunday, October 21, 1990, the Swiss Chalet Restaurant closed for business at 11:00 p.m. One of the employees had been out of the restaurant on an errand and, upon returning at 11:30 p.m., was confronted by two men. One of the men, alleged to be the other party charged in the robbery, was armed with a hand gun. The other man, the applicant, carried a shot gun. The man with the hand gun demanded that the employee take them into the restaurant. Once inside, the staff were herded in an office where they were ordered to lie face down on the floor. They were tied up by the two intruders. At one point, a shotgun was placed at one employee's head and, according to the sentencing judge, "the only reasonable inference from the evidence is that is was Cherrington who was holding the shotgun at the time." The employees were then ordered into the walk-in refrigerator and the door was closed behind them. The robbers took the receipts, cut the telephone lines, and left. The trial judged added that "while this [the robbery] was a joint enterprise, the co-accused played a more direct role in orchestrating what the victims were to do." The accused was sentenced to 30 months in prison, although he was granted full parole on June 29, 1992.
[5]
An inquiry was held in Kingston before Adjudicator G.R. McBrien on March 13, 1993. The Adjudicator determined that the applicant was a person described in s. 27(1)(d)(i) of the
Immigration Act
and issued a deportation order. This decision was appealed to the Appeal Division. A hearing, at which the applicant was present and represented by counsel, was held before Ethel Teitelbaum. The validity of the deportation order was not in dispute; the only matter on appeal concerned the equitable situation of the applicant. By decision dated September 13, 1993 and signed on September 27, 1993, the Appeal Division dismissed the appeal. The actual order reads:
"The Appeal Division orders that the appeal be dismissed. The removal order made the 13th day of March, 1992 is in accordance with the law and it has not been established that, having regard to all of the circumstances of the case, the appellant should not be removed from Canada."
[6]
The decision was mailed to the applicant at 57 Parkwood Village Drive, Apt. 414, North York, Ontario, M3A 2X2. The decision was also mailed to the applicant's counsel of record, Michael Smith. Although the applicant states that he has at all material times lived at the above-noted address, he submits that he did not receive a copy of the decision. Did he make inquiries?
[7]
On November 17, 1993, a letter was mailed to the applicant at the above-noted address, ordering him to appear for an interview on November 24 to make arrangements for his removal from Canada. According to the affidavit of Michael Gratton, an immigration officer, he received a telephone call from the applicant's brother, Desmond Cherrington, on November 24, 1993. The applicant's brother advised Mr. Gratton that the applicant was in the United States and would be returning in December 1993. Mr. Gratton advised the applicant's brother that the applicant should contact him on his return and that he would hold off issuing a warrant for the applicant's arrest until Christmas.
[8]
The applicant was arrested by Immigration authorities on September 20, 1994. The applicant admits that, at the time of his arrest, he was told that his appeal against the deportation order had been dismissed. However, he reiterated that he had not received previous notice of the dismissal of the appeal.
Issue
s
[9]
The applicant submits that there are five issues for the court's consideration:
(1) whether the Appeal Division had regard to all of the circumstances of the applicant's case when it decided that he should be removed from Canada;
(2) whether the Appeal Division had regard to the objective evidence which was supportive of the applicant;
(3) whether the Appeal Division erred in law by ignoring relevant evidence;
(4) whether the Appeal Division communicated its decision to the applicant after it was filed by the Registrar on December 27, 1993; and
(5) whether the applicant failed to report for removal when required by Canada Immigration.
[10]
In my opinion, the final two issues raised by the applicant -- the communication of the decision and the failure to report -- are immaterial to this judicial review. The applicant was granted an extension of time and leave to seek a judicial review of the Appeal Division decision. It is irrelevant whether he received the decision since he now knows of the outcome of the appeal. Accordingly, I will consider only the first three issues raised by the applicant.
Analysis And Application To The Case
At Bar
[11]
As a preliminary matter, I have set out the statutory scheme which is culminating in this judicial review. Pursuant to s. 27 of the
Immigration Act
, R.S.C. 1985 c. I-2, as amended ("the
Act
"), persons who are permanent residents of Canada can be removed under particular circumstances. Section 27(1)(d)(i) is relevant to the case at bar and provides:
"27(1) An immigration officer or a peace officer shall put forward a written report to the Deputy Minister setting out the details of any information in the possession of the immigration office or peace officer indicating that a permanent resident is a person who
(d) has been convicted of an offence under any Act of Parliament for which a term of imprisonment of
(i) more than six months has been imposed."
The applicant admits that he is a person described in s. 27(1)(d)(i) of the
Act
. Pursuant to s. 27(3), the Deputy Minister, upon receiving a report made under subs. (1), shall, if he considers it appropriate, forward a copy of the report to a senior immigration officer and may direct that an inquiry be held. As noted above, an inquiry was held and a deportation order was issued. Pursuant to s. 70 of the
Act
, the applicant appealed the decision of the Adjudicator to the Appeal Division. Under s. 70(3), an appeal can be based on two grounds: first, a question of law or fact, or mixed law and fact; or second, humanitarian and compassionate grounds. As already stated, the Appeal Division dismissed the applicant's appeal. The applicant seeks judicial review of this negative decision.
[12]
The applicant's arguments rest on a number of favourable or mitigating factors:
(1) the applicant was a first-time offender;
(2) the applicant was not armed (although, again, I note that this assertion is contested);
(3) the applicant did not commit the robbery, in that he was an accomplice but not an instigator;
(4) he released the hostages from the cooler (although this fact was not incorporated into the sentencing report);
(5) the applicant's father, stepmother, full brother, and five half-brothers are in Canada;
(6) the applicant has no family in Jamaica and no shelter, no job, and no guidance (although I note that there was evidence before the Appeal Division that he had a number of half-sisters);
(7) the applicant worked and went to school in Canada;
(8) the applicant presented well on psychological testing;
(9) he presented well on appraisal for full parole; and
(10) the applicant was considered to be a contributing member of the community by the assistant manager of parole services.
[13]
The applicant submits that either the Appeal Division did not take these factors into account or ignored the evidence. Having read the transcript of the hearing before the Appeal Division, I do not agree with the applicant's submissions. The factors asserted by the applicant were before the Appeal Division and, indeed, the applicant and a number of witnesses fleshed out a number of details. The applicant has not pointed me to anything that would indicate that the Appeal Division ignored evidence; indeed, the applicant seems to want this court to reweigh the evidence. The proper weight to be given to evidence is a matter for the Appeal Division and is not subject to review by this court.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R.(2d) 35 (F.C.A.), a case which also concerned the removal from Canada of a permanent resident because he had committed a serious crime, MacGuigan, J.A., affirmed that the weighing of evidence was in the purview of the tribunal. As well, His Lordship went on to explain the rationale behind these measures:
"We are not dealing here with a provision requiring the imposition of a severe punishment for an offence. Section 32(2) does not impose a punishment; that provision is the necessary corollary of the limits imposed by s. 4 of the
Act
on the right of a permanent resident to come and remain in Canada. Once it is established that a permanent resident is described in s. 27(1), that person no longer has the right to remain in the country. There is nothing disproportionate or unreasonable in requiring that a deportation order be then made against that person. Deportation is the only practical means of forcing a foreigner who is illegally here to leave. Moreover, Parliament may and must impose limits on the right enjoyed by permanent residents to remain in the country. And, in my view, it cannot be seriously argued that there be anything cruel, unusual or unreasonable in prescribing that permanent residents will lose the right to remain here if they are found guilty of an offence which Parliament considers to be, in itself, a serious offence."
[14]
I endorse the statements made by MacGuigan, J.A., and find that the material before this court does not provide any basis for finding that the Appeal Division erred in dismissing the applicant's appeal. This application for judicial review is dismissed.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/saf
[End of document]