[1]
Teitelbaum, J
: As a result of an Application for Summary Judgment and after a hearing, the undersigned issued the following judgment on October 31, 1994:
"For the reasons found in the Reasons for Summary Judgment, the defendants 163564 Canada Inc., c.o.b. as Bar Penthouse-1 and Pierre Savard have infringed the exclusive rights of the plaintiff in trademark registration Nos. 116,455, 196,356, 212,193 and 233,324 ('the Penthouse Trade Marks') and depreciated the value of the goodwill attaching to the Penthouse Trade Marks.
"The said defendants, their officers, directors, servants, agents and employees are hereby restrained from:
(i) using the trademark 'Penthouse' or any trademark or trade name which is confusingly similar to any of the 'Penthouse' Marks and, in particular, using the trademark or trade name 'Bar Penthouse-1';
(ii) using or carrying on business under a trademark or trade name containing the word 'Penthouse' or any other word or words so nearly resembling 'Penthouse' as to be calculated to deceive the public or to induce the belief that the business carried on by the defendants is in any way connected with the business of the plaintiff, and generally from passing off the business of the defendants as those of the plaintiff; and
(iii) directing public attention to their business in such a way as to cause, or be likely to cause, confusion between the business and services of the defendants and the business and services of the plaintiff;
"The defendants are hereby ordered to deliver up to the plaintiff or destroy under oath, all signs, advertising material or other material the use of which would offend the herein injunction.
"A reference is hereby ordered to determine the plaintiff's damages.
"Costs of the herein motion and action in favour of the plaintiff as against the defendants 163564 Canada Inc. c.o.b. as Bar Penthouse-1 and Pierre Savard.
"As against the defendant Wilson, the application for Summary Judgment is denied with costs in favour of the defendant Wilson."
[2]
For the purposes of the present proceedings, it is important to note that I ordered the defendants 163564 Canada Inc., c.o.b. as Bar Penthouse-1 and Pierre Savard "to deliver up to the plaintiff or destroy under oath, all signs ... the use of which would offend the herein injunction".
[3]
As a result of my October 31, 1994 judgment, the plaintiff, on January 27, 1995, filed a Notice of Motion into the Court Registry wherein plaintiff requests, ex parte, for:
"An order requiring the defendants 163564 Canada Inc., c.o.b. as Bar Penthouse-1, and Pierre Savard to show cause why they should not be condemned for contempt of the judgment of Mr. Justice Teitelbaum dated October 31, 1994;"
[4]
The grounds for the motion, as stated in the Notice of Motion, are:
"1. By judgment dated October 31, 1994, the defendants 163564 Canada Inc., c.o.b. as Bar Penthouse-1, and Pierre Savard ('the corporate defendants'), their officers, directors, servants, agents and employees were restrained from:
(i) using the trademark 'Penthouse' or any trademark or trade name which is confusingly similar to any of the 'Penthouse' Marks and, in particular, using the trademark or trade name 'Bar Penthouse-1';
(ii) using or carrying on business under a trademark or trade name containing the word 'Penthouse' or any other word or words so nearly resembling 'Penthouse' as to be calculated to deceive the public or to induce the belief that the business carried on by the defendants is in any way connected with the business of the plaintiff, and generally from passing off the business of the defendants as those of the plaintiff; and
(iii) directing public attention to their business in such a way as to cause, or be likely to cause, confusion between the business and services of the defendants and the business and services of the plaintiff;
"2. The corporate defendants were further ordered to deliver up to the plaintiff or destroy under oath, all signs, advertising material or other material the use of which would offend the injunction granted.
"3. After numerous requests for delivery up or production of an affidavit certifying destruction of such material, the defendant Pierre Savard, on his own behalf and on behalf of the defendant 163564 Canada Inc., swore an affidavit dated December 7, 1994 that on or about November 29, 1994, the sign for the business Bar Penthouse-1 was modified, such that the name Bar Penthouse-1 no longer appeared.
"4. The corporate defendants have merely covered up the word 'Penthouse' on their signs.
"5. Accordingly, the corporate defendants have not delivered up to the plaintiff nor destroyed under oath all signs and other material the use of which would offend the injunction granted by Mr. Justice Teitelbaum."
[5]
On January 30th, 1995, Peter A.K. Giles, Associate Senior Prothonotary, issued the following Order:
"It Is Ordered that the defendant Pierre Savard and the defendant 163564 Canada Inc. by a senior officer appear before the court at 10:00 a.m. on Monday the 27th day of February 1995 at 8th floor, 330 University Avenue, Toronto to show cause why they should not be condemned for contempt of the judgment of The Honourable Mr. Justice Teitelbaum dated October 31, 1994."
[6]
The show cause hearing took place in Montreal on the 13th day of March 1995. At the end of the hearing, it was agreed that the matter would be continued sine die in order to enable the defendant Savard, if that is what he wants to do, to produce an affidavit indicating that he had destroyed the sign pursuant to my October 31, 1994 judgment.
[7]
The defendant has now filed such an affidavit.
[8]
I must now decide whether the plaintiff made evidence before me on March 13, 1995 to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the above-mentioned defendants were in contempt of court by not delivering up to the plaintiff or destroying under oath all signs which would offend the issued injunction dated October 31, 1994.
[9]
The plaintiff called one witness, Mr. Patrice Boucher, a private investigator. Mr. Boucher, in his evidence, stated that in October 1994 he took pictures of the defendants' premises. Two of three pictures were produced as plaintiff's Exhibits P-1 and P-2. He explained that, as can be seen from Exhibits P-1 and P-2, the name Penthouse and Penthouse 1 is clearly visible on the sign in front of the defendants' premises.
[10]
These two pictures were taken before the issuance of my judgment.
[11]
Mr. Boucher testified to the fact that on March 1, 1995 he went back to the defendants' premises and took other photos. Plaintiff filed as Exhibits P-3, P-4, P-5 and P-6, photos taken by Mr. Boucher on March 1, 1995. Mr. Boucher stated that as can be seen from the photos, in Exhibits P-3 and P-4, one of the signs that could be found in one of the windows of the premises has been removed. On the outdoor sign, the word Penthouse appears to be covered with some sort of tape but it is the same outdoor sign of October 1994.
[12]
He also testified that on two signs near the entrance to the defendants' premises, the original signs are still there but that the word Penthouse, one sign, is more or less covered by some sort of tape and on the other the tape covers the Pent but that the letters U and E of House are not covered and that the letters O, U and S are only partially covered so that one could make out the word Penthouse (see Exhibits P-5 and P-6).
[13]
Plaintiff made no further proof.
[14]
Defendants' counsel, before deciding that he had no proof to offer, made a verbal application of non-suit.
[15]
I immediately dismissed the said application as I am satisfied no such application is available in contempt of court proceedings. In contempt of court proceedings, the plaintiff must prove beyond a reasonable doubt the failure of the defendant to fulfil the terms of the injunction. If plaintiff is unable to do so, the application for contempt of court will be dismissed. Both plaintiff and defendant will present whatever evidence they wish to present and the court will then decide if the evidence presented by plaintiff proved beyond a reasonable doubt the failure of defendant to do what he or she was ordered to do.
[16]
After I dismissed defendants' counsel's motion for non-suit, he stated that the contempt proceedings must and should be dismissed because and only because the plaintiff's proof consisted of the testimony of the private investigator, Mr. Boucher and the filing of the six photos, Exhibits P-1 to P-6. He makes the following submission.
[17]
On January 27, 1995, the defendants 163564 Canada Inc. and Pierre Savard were served by an Order issued by the Associate Senior Prothonotary requiring the defendants to show cause why they should not be condemned for contempt of my judgment of October 31, 1994.
[18]
Counsel states that the only evidence made before me on March 13, 1995 were six photos, two taken in October 1994, that is before my October 31, 1994 judgment and four photos, according to Mr. Boucher, taken on March 1, 1995. Therefore, counsel for defendants submits, the Associate Senior Prothonotary had no evidence before him to have issued his Order of January 27, 1995.
[19]
The process, pursuant to rule 355(4) of the
Federal Court Rules
is a two stage process. The first stage is the application for an order that the alleged contemnor show cause why contempt should not be found. The party making the application must establish a prima facie case of contempt.
"355(4) No one may be condemned for contempt of court committed out of the presence of the judge, unless he has been served with a show cause order ordering him to appear before the court, on the day and at the hour fixed to hear proof of the acts with which he is charged and to urge any grounds of defence that he may have. The show cause order issued by the judge of his own motion or on application must be served personally, unless for valid reasons another mode of service is authorized. The application for the issuance of the show cause order may be presented without its being necessary to have it served."
[20]
Counsel submits that since the only evidence presented were photographs taken on March 1, 1995, there could not have been evidence before the Associate Senior Prothonotary to have issued his show cause order.
[21]
I immediately dismissed this submission.
[22]
The evidence made before me on March 13, 1995 does not necessarily have to have any relation to the evidence made before the Associate Senior Prothonotary. All that is required for the show cause order to issue is prima facie made on the basis of affidavit evidence which affidavit evidence must indicate, in sufficient detail, what acts may be in contravention of the judgment of October 31, 1994.
[23]
If, in this case, the Associate Senior Prothonotary was satisfied, as he was, that the plaintiff established, by affidavit evidence, a prima facie case, he issues the show cause order.
[24]
This is the first stage of contempt proceedings. At the second stage, the guilt of the alleged contemnor must be established to the criminal law standard of proof beyond a reasonable doubt.
[25]
As I have stated, plaintiff's proof consisted of the testimony of Mr. Boucher and the production of six photos filed as Exhibits P-1 to P-6. For reasons only known to counsel for the defendants, he decided not to call any witnesses nor to submit any evidence.
[26]
After "proof" was closed, counsel for the defendants, in his submission, stated that there was no proof beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendants had the mens rea, the intention not to obey the terms of the injunction and that they acted in "good faith".
[27]
This submission is entirely without merit. In contempt of court proceedings, mens rea "intention" or "good faith" is of no consequence other than in considering penalties.
[28]
On the issue of mens rea, Mr. Justice Dubé, in the case of
Baxter Travenol  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  wherein Pratte, J. (then of the Trial Division), would not 'punish the defendants for having, in good faith, given a possibly wrong but not unreasonable interpretation to an order of this court'. The order was an injunction restraining the defendant from infringing the plaintiff's trademark.
"As to the conduct of this defendant in the instant case, Cattanach, J., had this to say in his February 3, 1981 judgment (at p. 9 [pp. 151-152]):
'I expressed the view at the hearing, and to which view I adhere, that the conduct of the defendant through its chief executive officer, has the stench of sharp and perhaps even misleading practice and that the defendant and its chief executive officer were devoid of standards of ethics but that in all likelihood such ethics are neither expected nor required in the jungle of the business world and the rewards may be greater to those vested with inherent predatory cunning.'
"
Borrie and Lowe's Law of Contempt
, 2nd Ed. (1983), considers the requirement for mens rea in Chapter 13, titled 'Civil Contempt'. The answer is clearly 'that it is not necessary to show that the defendant is intentionally contumacious or that he intends to interfere with the administration of justice'. The authors, at p. 400, quote Sachs, L.J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  injunction prohibits an act, that prohibition is absolute and is not to be related to intent unless otherwise stated on the face of the order.'
"The authors quote Warrington, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  say that the act was not contumacious ...'. In
Re Agreement of Mileage
, contempt was held to have been established even through the acts were done 'reasonably and despite all due care and attention, in the belief, based on legal advice, that they were not breaches'."
[29]
In the Court of Appeal decision of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 449, at p. 454, Mr. Justice Urie, speaking for the court, states:
"Having said that, counsel conceded, correctly I think, that the presence or absence of good faith on the part of an alleged contemnor is not relevant in the determination of whether or not there was an act of contempt. It is relevant only in considering the penalty to be imposed, as a mitigating factor."
[30]
Clearly mens rea, intention or good faith, is not a consideration in determining the issue of contempt of court.
[31]
There therefore remains the issue of determining whether plaintiff has proven beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendants have not complied with my judgment of October 31, 1994.
[32]
The evidence clearly establishes that the defendants have failed to deliver up to the plaintiff the sign that still remains in front of the premises.
[33]
Did the defendants "destroy" the sign by removing the window sign found in Exhibit P-1 and by taping or partially taping over the word Penthouse on the outside signs?
[34]
I am satisfied that the defendants have "destroyed" the window sign by removing same even if Pierre Savard has failed to file an affidavit to that effect.
[35]
I am satisfied that by taping over, either entirely or partially, the Penthouse signs, the defendants have not "destroyed" the said signs.
[36]
In the
Concise Oxford Dictionary of Current English
, sixth edition, Oxford at the Clarendon Press, "destroy" is defined as:
"Pull or break down, demolish; make useless; kill, annihilate; nullify, neutralize effect of"
[37]
In the
Houghton Mifflin Canadian Dictionary of the English Language
published in 1982 by Houghton Mifflin Canada Limited, the word "destroy" is defined as:
"1. To ruin completely; spoil so that restoration is impossible; consume;
ancient manuscripts destroyed by fire
. 2. To tear down or break up; raze; demolish 3. To do away with; get rid of; put an end to
'In crowded populations, poverty destroys the possibility of cleanliness
' (G.B. Shaw) 4. To kill 5. To render useless or ineffective 6. To subdue or defeat completely; crush - To be destructive or harmful: '
Too much money destroys as surely as too little
' (John Simon)"
[38]
The underlying meaning of the word "destroy" is to demolish or make useless or to spoil so that restoration is impossible.
[39]
It is very clear by looking at Exhibits P-3, P-4, P-5 and P-6 that by putting tape on the word Penthouse on the outdoor sign, the defendants failed to "destroy" the signs in issue.
[40]
Clearly, the defendants have failed to deliver up or destroy the signs in issue and are therefore in contempt of my judgment of October 31, 1994.
[41]
As stated, good faith or a lack of mens rea (intention) is a consideration in determining penalty.
[42]
How can the court determine if the failure of the defendants to obey the judgment of October 31, 1994 was not done in bad faith and without intention? Only by having the defendants testify to this fact and give an explanation for not obeying the judgment.
[43]
In the present case, the defendants did not make any evidence. Counsel for defendants, in his argument, stated that there was a lack of funds to make over the existing sign.
[44]
How am I to agree if no evidence was made before me to this effect. Counsel informs me that Mr. Savard was in good faith because he believed that the removal of the window sign and the taping over of the other sign, he was not in contravention of my judgment. I have no evidence to this effect.
[45]
Clearly, the evidence is that the defendants failed to obey the terms of my judgment issued on October 31, 1994 and are therefore guilty of contempt.
[46]
On May 11, 1995, the defendant Pierre Savard filed into the Federal Court Registry an affidavit in which he states:
"3. Le commerce anciennement connu sous le nom de 'Bar Penthouse-1' opère désormais sous le nom 'Cabaret Les Dolls', tel qu'il appert de la copie de la déclaration d'immatriculation jointe au présent affidavit;
"4. Tous les panneaux, enseignes, affiches et autres du genre où apparaissaient le nom 'Bar Penthouse-1' ont été modifiés afin d'y faire disparaître l'ancien nom du commerce; tel qu'il appert de multiples photographies jointes au présent affidavit;
"5. Tous les chèques, compte(s) de banque et autres documents du genre ont été modifiés de la même façon;
"6. Le commerce est dorénavant connu sous le nom 'Cabaret Les Dolls' et le nom 'Bar Penthouse-1' n'apparaît plus sur les lieux du commerce des défendeurs."
[47]
It is clear that the defendants have now cured their default. There now only remains to determine the penalty to be imposed.
[48]
After reading the written submissions made to me by counsel for the defendants, I am satisfied that the defendants did not purposely attempt to contravene the judgment of this court dated October 31, 1994.
[49]
I am satisfied that the defendants did not destroy the infringing signs in an attempt to save money. By covering the signs, where necessary, with a black tape, the defendants obviously were of the belief that they were no longer contravening the October 31, 1994 judgment.
[50]
In determining penalty, as I have stated, good faith is to be considered.
[51]
Now that the defendants have cured their default, I see no purpose in ordering the defendants to pay a substantial fine.
[52]
The defendant 163564 Canada Inc. which was also known as Bar Penthouse-1 is ordered to pay a sum of $250 as penalty payable within a maximum delay of 30 days of today's date.
[53]
The defendant, Pierre Savard, is ordered to pay a sum of $750 as penalty payable within a maximum delay of 30 days of today's date.
[54]
Furthermore, the defendants, either alone or together, shall pay to the plaintiff a sum of $6,907.60 which sum I fix as plaintiff's costs and disbursements.
[55]
The defendants shall have a delay of 30 days of today's date to pay the said sum of $6,907.60.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Jean Merlini/saf
[End of document]