[1]
McKeown, J.
: The applicant, a citizen of Egypt, seeks judicial review of the August 17, 1995 decision of the Convention Refugee Determination Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board (the Board) wherein it was determined that the applicant is not a Convention refugee.
[2]
The issue is whether the applicant, as a member of a particular social group specifically targeted by terrorists has a well-founded fear of persecution on the grounds that the state, while capable of protecting ordinary citizens, is incapable of protecting members of that particular group.
[3]
The Board did not dispute the applicant's testimony with respect to the four incidents he experienced. The Board stated that it found the applicant's testimony to be credible as to these four occurrences. The Board found that there was no failure of state protection.
[4]
The Board cited documentary evidence which clearly indicates that the Egyptian government is taking appropriate measures to deal with the terrorist problem and that Egypt is a country which recognizes the importance of the protection of human rights. The Board referred to
Minister of Employment and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R.(2d) 130 (F.C.A.), to support the position that no government has to guarantee protection for its inhabitants, especially in situations involving random terrorist attacks. It concluded that the Egyptian state is in effective control of its territory and is making serious efforts to protect its citizens; the mere fact that the state is not always successful is not enough to justify the applicant's claim.
[5]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , La Forest, J., made it clear that in order to be a successful refugee claimant one need not show that the state is the agent of persecution nor that the state is complicit in that persecution. There may be situations in which a claimant is being persecuted by someone other than the state, however, the state may be unable to protect the individual. The test, as set out by La Forest, J., in
Ward
, supra, is found at pp. 724-725:
"... only in situations in which state protection 'might reasonably have been forthcoming', will the claimant's failure to approach the state for protection defeat his claim. Put another way, the claimant will not meet the definition of 'Convention refugee' where it is objectively unreasonable for the claimant not to have sought the protection of his home authorities; otherwise, the claimant need not literally approach the state.
"The issue that arises, then, is how, in a practical sense, a claimant makes proof of a state's inability to protect its nationals as well as the reasonable nature of the claimant's refusal actually to seek out this protection. On the facts of this case, proof on this point was unnecessary, as representatives of the state authorities conceded their inability to protect Ward. Where such an admission is not available, however, clear and convincing confirmation of a state's inability to protect must be provided. For example, a claimant might advance testimony of similarly situated individuals let down by the state protection arrangement or the claimant's testimony of past personal incidents in which state protection did not materialize. Absent some evidence, the claim should fail, as nations should be presumed capable of protecting their citizens ..."
[6]
La Forest, J., concluded the analysis of this issue by stating at p. 726:
"In summary, I find that state complicity is not a necessary component of persecution, either under the 'unwilling' or under the 'unable' branch of the definition. A subjective fear of persecution combined with state inability to protect the claimant creates a presumption that the fear is well-founded ..."
[7]
The applicant in the instant case is a member of a particular social group, his family. He is also a member of a group which can be labelled the children of police officers who are anti-terrorist supporters. It appears from the evidence before the tribunal that the authorities were effectively unable to protect the children of police officers and the documentary evidence supports that statement. In fact the Board stated at page 5 of its reasons:
"The claimant testified that the police could not protect their own children and cited documentary evidence to that effect. The panel finds this indeed may be the case, but, in particular, the reason they were unable to protect was not their lack of ability."
[8]
Upon reading this statement it is difficult to know what the Board members meant. It seems as though the Board was agreeing that the Egyptian police were unable to protect the children of police officers but that there was some reason for them not being able to do so which did not have to do with their lack of ability. It is unclear why the Board would say there was no failure of state protection if it agreed that the state was unable to protect this particular group.
[9]
The Board also stated at page 6 of its reasons:
"In the case at hand, the police were not able to identify, locate or arrest those responsible for the assaults upon the claimant and his father because information to do so was not forthcoming. Their inability to do so was not based on any of the Convention reasons."
[10]
The law does not require that the inability to protect be connected to a Convention reason.
[11]
The respondent argued that the reason the police in this case were having difficulty protecting the individual was due to the nature of the attacks which would be impossible for most police departments to effectively combat. The respondent referred to
Smirnov and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), which was relied upon by the Board. In that decision Gibson, J., stated at page 5:
"... Random assaults, such as those suffered by the applicants, where the assailants are unknown to the victim and there are no independent witnesses are also difficult to effectively investigate and protect against ..."
[12]
However, the attacks in this case are not random in that the applicant was specifically and directly targeted in each one of these incidents. The terrorists contacted the applicant and his father at their home, they called the applicant's name out prior to spraying bullets in his direction and a bomb was set under the applicant's vehicle. It is clear that the applicant has been singled out by the Muslim Brotherhood in their revenge against his father.
[13]
While it is clear that the government in Egypt is taking steps and is attempting to control the terrorist problem, it is less clear that this constitutes effective state protection for the applicant in this case.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R.(2d) 225 (F.C.A.), the applicant was a citizen of Peru living in a stable police controlled area of that country and had been targeted by terrorist groups as a nonsupporter. The Board used the documentary evidence in this case to support the finding that the government authorities and agencies "were making successful efforts to counteract insurgency and violence in Peru". However, Desjardins, J.A., stated at page 6:
"... The Board members do not appear to have considered the possibility that persons specifically targeted, who may qualify as members of a particular social group, might still have good grounds for fearing persecution when a state is capable of protecting ordinary citizens but incapable of protecting members of that particular social group ..."
[14]
This is precisely the point in the instant case. Egypt is taking steps to deal with terrorist activities as they exist there generally. However, the applicant has been specifically targeted by a terrorist group in Egypt and in none of the four incidents experienced by the applicant have the authorities been able to provide protection to the applicant. This, in turn, is supported by the documentary evidence which suggests that recently children of police officers have been attacked and murdered.
[15]
It is noted that it is very difficult for a state to effectively protect its citizens against terrorism. As stated by Hugessen, J.A., in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, at page 132:
"No government that makes any claim to democratic values or protection of human rights can
guarantee
the protection of all of its citizens at all times ..."
[16]
In most cases the inability to protect against random terrorist attacks will not constitute an inability of the state to protect. But
Ward
, supra, and <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, have set out a limited exception where past personal incidents may qualify an individual as a member of a particular social group which the state is unable to protect. In the present case there is a specifically and directly targeted applicant who is a member of a small targeted group. This distinguishes the case from most cases which involve random incidents of terrorism.
[17]
For the above reasons, the matter should be sent back to the same panel on the same record for a redetermination in a manner not inconsistent with these reasons.
Application allowed.
Editor: Kelli A. Simmonds/slm
[End of document]