[1]
Muldoon, J.
: A Convention Refugee Determination Division (CRDD) tribunal examined the applicant on August 3 and October 5, 1994. On December 12, 1994, the tribunal decided that the applicant was not a Convention refugee. The applicant filed an application for leave and judicial review of the CRDD (Convention Refugee Determination Division) decision on December 23, 1994, and leave was granted on July 27, 1995, by Gibson, J.
Background
[2]
The applicant was born on May 18, 1964, in Fuzhou City, in rural China, where he continued to reside until he left China. He was married in December 1990, and his wife gave birth to a son in December 1991. Although couples living in rural China are permitted to have two children, the birth of the children must be appropriately spaced out. The applicant's wife was again pregnant in 1993, this was done counter to the population control policy and without the permission of the Family Planning Committee (FPC). The applicant attempted to hide his wife's pregnancy from the FPC by sending his wife to her parents. Despite these measures, the FPC discovered his wife's pregnancy and she was forced to have an abortion. Because of "poor equipment and conditions" of the hospital his wife became severely ill following the abortion. The applicant's wife's illness prompted him to write a report to the court (allegedly the same as a lawsuit - statement of claim) alleging negligence by the birth control officials. In the report he asked for financial compensation and that the problems within the birth control office be dealt with by the court. The court responded by allegedly informing the applicant that it could not deal with this request and that it would be forwarding a copy of the report to the birth control office. The birth control office after receiving the letter decided that it would make an example out of the applicant and have him arrested. The applicant fled the country after he was informed by his uncle who was on the village committee of this imminent arrest. He arrived in Canada at Pearson International Airport on January 13, 1994.
Applicant's Submission
[3]
The applicant seeks the following relief;
"an order of Certiorari to quash the decision of the Panel and an order of Mandamus compelling the Panel to grant a new hearing."
on the following grounds;
"a. The decision was unlawfully made, in that the Panel misconstrued the definition of a Convention Refugee;
"b. The panel acted without jurisdiction, acted beyond its jurisdiction or refused to exercise its jurisdiction;
"c. The decision that the Applicant is not a Convention Refugee is invalid on its face in that the proceedings were tainted with procedural irregularities which effectively denied the applicant a right to a fair hearing in accordance with the principles of natural justice and the requirements of fundamental justice that it was required by law to observe;
"d. The Decision was based on erroneous findings of fact in that the Board members failed to consider all of the evidence in a fair and judicious manner and instead made their decision in a capricious or perverse manner without regard for the material before the Panel."
[4]
The applicant's arguments are found at pp. 71-76 of the applicant's Record, specifically paragraphs 17-31 of the applicant's Memorandum of Argument. In his submissions the applicant states that the tribunal; did not clearly state why it found the applicant lacking in credibility, based its decision on irrelevant facts, was composed of a member who was biased because of her local knowledge, misinterpreted the definition of Convention refugee.
Respondent's Position
[5]
The respondent in its Memorandum of Argument deals with the issues it determined as relevant, specifically interpretation of the evidence (standard of review) and well-founded fear of persecution (Convention refugee definition). The respondent has implicitly dismissed the applicant's other arguments as irrelevant by not responding to them. The court will deal with the applicant's other arguments in the discussion section. The respondent states that the tribunal examined the evidence and the applicant carefully and was fully within its right to weigh the evidence and the applicant's testimony as it wished. It specifically stated in its reasons that it had some concerns with regard to the report (statement of claim) that the applicant allegedly filed with the court. In the transcripts the applicant clarifies the description of the "report" as a "letter of complaint" that was composed with the help of a law student acquaintance. The transcripts support the respondent's interpretation of this evidence and rebut the assertion of the applicant that the respondent has made an erroneous finding of fact.
[6]
With regard to the definition of Convention refugee, the respondent states that the evidence presented did not establish good grounds for a well-founded fear of persecution. The respondent cites
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), for the proposition that even when there are apparent errors made by the trier of fact, "in the absence of any miscarriage of justice, the appeal could not succeed". Further, the respondent also put forward the following propositions; that tribunal decisions are usually held to be reviewable only when they are patently unreasonable,
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  O.A.C. 348; 21 C.R.R.(2d) 236; 24 Imm. L.R.(2d) 117, and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  B.C.A.C. 1; 75 W.A.C. 1; [1994] 7 W.W.R. 1; 92 B.C.L.R.(2d) 145; 114 D.L.R.(4th) 385,
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.).
Discussion
[7]
The applicant also brought forward the issues of credibility and bias in this matter. With regard to credibility the applicant offered
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R.(2d) 150 (F.C.A.), in which Heald, J.A., stated:
"In my view, the decision 'a quo' is defective for another reason. In the circumstances of this case, the Board owed a duty to this applicant to give its reasons for rejecting the applicant's Refugee claim on the ground of credibility in clear and unmistakeable terms [Footnote: See
Re Pitts and Director of Family Benefit Branch of the Ministry of Community and Social Services
, 51 O.R.(2d) p. 302, Ontario Divisional Court]. At page 310 of the
Pitts
case, Mr. Justice Reid said:
'The task of determining credibility may be a difficult one but it must be faced. If the board sees fit to reject a claim on the ground of credibility, it owes a duty to the claimant to state clearly its grounds for disbelief. The board cannot simply say, as the member did here, "I Feel that I have not received credible evidence to rescind the decision of the respondent". Some reason for thinking the evidence not credible must be given if an appearance of arbitrariness is to be avoided.'"
[8]
However, it is apparent from the CRDD's reasons that it did not base its decision upon the credibility of the applicant's testimony but rather whether he had proven that a well-founded fear of persecution exists. Therefore, the issue of credibility is not an issue and was not responded to by the respondent.
[9]
Secondly, the applicant alleges bias on the part of a tribunal member, in that she allegedly applied her own domestic experiences as a family planning worker to the applicant's circumstances. After a review of the transcript, the court could find nothing which points towards bias. The tribunal even states: (p. 6 Reasons)
"Despite the implausibility of the story presented by the claimant, the panel accepts that his wife's second pregnancy was aborted because this is normal practice in population control."
[10]
The CRDD clearly gives the applicant the benefit of doubt and accepts his version of the story. Again, the tribunal found that the root of the applicant's fear of persecution was not his breach of the "one-child" policy but rather the report he sent to the court. Moreover, it was well within the jurisdiction of the tribunal to weigh the evidence adduced and determine that the applicant insufficiently established the nexus between a well-founded fear of persecution and his letter. However, even if it were the letter, should Canada confer refugee status on people who, due to their stupidity or wilfulness, create discrimination against themselves, as if purposely seeking trouble or even martyrdom? One cannot answer that question in these circumstances without knowing the tone and content of the applicant's letter of complaint, and without knowing the allegations upon which the alleged summons was based.
[11]
At p. 710 of the transcript the applicant is recorded as recounting his best recollection of the content of his letter of complaint. It does appear to be rather shrill and inflammatory. Up to a point, such characteristics do not constitute an offence in Canada but might well do so in a totalitarian State. He seems to have avoided allegations of just the facts and resorted to slogan-type allegations of bad faith. The onus is on the applicant to prove persecution, but he presented to the CRDD evidence of prosecution which falls very short of persecution. The CRDD is not shown to have erred in this regard.
[12]
There is nothing on file which would lead to the conclusion that the tribunal's decision was patently unreasonable. Therefore, the court will not grant any relief with regard to this judicial review.
[13]
The application is dismissed.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Gary W. McLaughlin/gs
[End of document]