[1]
Jerome, A.C.J.
: This is an application for an order setting aside the decision of the Convention Refugee Determination Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board which held the applicant is not a Convention refugee. At the hearing of this matter I dismissed the application indicating these written reasons would follow.
[2]
Ms. Sommariva, a citizen of Argentina, arrived in Canada on July 18, 1989. She made a claim for Convention refugee status in December of 1989, based on a well-founded fear of persecution by reason of her political opinion and membership in a particular social group. A hearing was held before the Refugee Division on September 7, 1993, and February 28, 1994. By decision dated December 16, 1994, the tribunal determined that the applicant was not a Convention refugee on the basis that her testimony was not credible.
[3]
The applicant now seeks to have that decision set aside on the grounds the tribunal erred in its conclusion that she was not credible. It is further submitted that her
Charter
rights to a fair hearing were violated because only one Board member participated in the decision-making process.
[4]
Section 63(2) of the
Immigration Act
specifically contemplates one-member panel decisions where one of the individuals who heard the claim is unable to participate in its disposition. There is no merit to the applicant's contention that the decision of this court in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), stands for the proposition that the use of s. 63(2) of the
Immigration Act
is a
Charter
violation. The decision in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> must be read in the context of its particular facts, which were that both Board members knew at the time of the hearing that one of them was going to cease to hold office a few days after the hearing. Under those circumstances, it was found that the Board had purposely set out to deny the claimant his right to a two-member decision.
[5]
That is clearly not the situation in the present case. There is nothing to suggest that either Board member knew on the dates of the hearing, that Board member Mak Sultan was going to cease to hold office. I am satisfied, therefore, that the applicant's
Charter
rights to a fair hearing were not in any way violated by the use of s. 63(2) of the
Immigration Act
.
[6]
Questions relating to an applicant's credibility are within the jurisdiction of the Refugee Division as the trier of fact in respect of Convention refugee claims. When, as in the present case, a tribunal's impugned finding relates to the credibility of a witness, the Court will be reluctant to interfere with that finding, given the tribunal's opportunity and ability to assess the witness, her demeanour, frankness, readiness to answer, coherence and consistency, in oral testimony before it. Here, in light of the evidence, the board's conclusions with respect to the applicant's credibility was entirely reasonable and there is no error which would warrant judicial interference.
[7]
After having carefully examined the reasons of the Refugee Division, I am satisfied it considered and weighed all of the evidence adduced by the applicant, and determined for the numerous and detailed reasons given, that Ms. Sommariva's testimony was simply not credible. I am unable to conclude the panel ignored the evidence before it or that its findings were perverse or capricious. In the absence of such an overriding error, there is simply no basis for judicial interference with the decision.
[8]
For these reasons, on July 5, 1995, I dismissed the application.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Kelli A. Simmonds/slm
[End of document]