[1]
Tremblay-Lamer, J.
[Translation]: This application for judicial review relates solely to the reason for the removal order made against the applicant. Would deportation to Croatia constitute cruel and unusual treatment within the meaning of s. 12 of the
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
?
[2]
I dismissed this application from the bench for the following reasons.
[3]
As in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), I concluded that it was premature to decide whether deportation to Croatia was cruel and unusual treatment until the Minister in fact decided to effect the removal to Croatia. At page 20 F.C., Mr. Justice MacGuigan stated:
"The issue as to the effect of section 12 on the
refoulement
of Convention refugees being still open, the next question is whether it ought to be dealt with on this appeal. My review is that it should not, since I agree with the Board that the appellant's argument is brought prematurely, against the wrong decision maker at the wrong stage."
[4]
In my view, it matters little whether the removal order is based on s. 52 or 53 of the
Immigration Act
. It is only when the Minister tries to execute the removal order, to compel the applicant to return to Croatia, that he may argue that removal is contrary to s. 12 of the
Charter
. Political situations change rapidly and it would be premature and pointless to determine at this point whether return to Croatia would be cruel when it may be that no such removal will ever take place, for example if the Minister decided to grant humanitarian relief under s. 114(2) of the
Act
, or to deport the applicant in a few years when the circumstances in the country, in this instance Croatia, have changed.
[5]
Accordingly, for these reasons, the application for judicial review is dismissed.
[6]
The applicant asked that the following question be certified to the Court of Appeal:
[Translation]
"With respect to the deportation of a permanent resident who is not covered by section 53 of the
Immigration Act
, is it premature for the Appeal Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board to determine whether deportation to the country of removal constitutes cruel and unusual treatment, contrary to section 12 of the
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
?"
[7]
In my opinion, the question suggested raises no question of general importance. Accordingly, the court should not certify it.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Janette Blue/sg