[1]
Teitelbaum, J.
: This is an application by the defendants, Sears Canada Inc. (Sears) and Sears Roebuck and Co. (Sears Roebuck) for leave to amend their statement of defence and for summary judgment, pursuant to rule 432.1 of the
Federal Court Rules
, dismissing the plaintiff's passing off action and trademark infringement action.
[2]
The plaintiff, Homelife Realty Services Inc. (Homelife), carries on a business in Canada in association with the franchising of a national network of real estate brokerage offices. The plaintiff is the registered owner of the trademark "Homelife", Registration No. 354, 894, as well as a number of trademarks which include the name "Homelife". The trademarks are registered for use in association with real estate brokerage services.
[3]
The defendant, Sears, is the operator of a chain of department stores in Canada. The defendant, Sears Roebuck, is the U.S. parent company of Sears. Since about 1989, Sears Roebuck has operated in the U.S. a series of stand-alone furniture stores in association with the trademark or trade name "Sears Homelife". These stand-alone furniture stores differ from the ordinary Sears Roebuck stores in that they only carry furniture.
[4]
On July 25, 1991, Sears Roebuck filed with the Canadian Trade Marks Office an application to register the trademark "Homelife The Furniture Store By Sears".
[5]
On January 17, 1995, Sears Roebuck filed an application with the Canadian Trade Marks Office to register the trademark "Sears Homelife Furniture Store". The application included a statement that Sears Roebuck, by itself or through a licensee, intends to use the trademark in Canada in association with retail department store and catalogue sales services, as well as home furnishings. Sears, to the extent is uses trademarks like Sears Canada, does so under license from Sears Roebuck. This trademark application remained pending from January 17, 1995 until October 13, 1995.
[6]
Sears, upon seeing the success of the Sears Homelife concept, namely the idea of stand-alone furniture stores, began considering launching a similar concept in Canada. In the spring of 1995, the decision was made that Sears would embark on a stand-alone furniture concept in Canada.
[7]
On April 24, 1995, at a Sears shareholder meeting, Don Shaffer, the president of Sears, announced the planned opening of a chain of stand-alone "Sears Homelife" furniture stores. Plans were also announced to unveil the first "Sears Homelife" store in August of 1995, in Kitchener, Ontario, with additional store openings planned. Reports of the announcement appeared in the
Globe & Mail
and other major Canadian newspapers in April and May of 1995.
[8]
On May 24, 1995, the plaintiff commenced an action against the defendants, by way of statement of claim, alleging passing off by the defendants, contrary to ss. 7(b) and (c) of the
Trade Marks Act
, depreciation of goodwill in the plaintiff's trademarks and infringement of the plaintiff's registered "Homelife" trademarks.
[9]
On June 20, 1995, the plaintiff filed an application for summary judgment and a motion for an interlocutory injunction.
[10]
As the defendants were of the view that the final disposition of the injunction application might be too close to the intended opening of the first Sears store, discussions were commenced between the defendants and the plaintiff. It was agreed that the interests of both parties would be best served by a full trial of all the issues raised in the pleadings, provided that such trial took place quickly. The defendants agreed that pending the trial or final disposition of the matter they would not operate any stand-alone furniture stores in Canada in association with any trademark including the word "Homelife" and would not use any trademark including the word "Homelife". The parties also agreed that the plaintiff's motion for injunction and summary judgment would be replaced with a motion seeking a court imposed timetable and a speedy trial of the matter. The agreement was dated July 10, 1995.
[11]
Pursuant to the above-noted agreement, the parties applied to the Federal Court for an order setting down a timetable. An order dated July 19, 1995, was obtained on consent, providing for a tentative trial date commencing May 6, 1996.
[12]
The defendants filed a statement of defence on July 31, 1995, indicating that "Sears Canada Inc. intends to use the trademark Sears Homelife Furniture Store in Canada, under license from Sears Roebuck & Co., in association with furniture retail services, and states that it has every right to do so".
[13]
As a result of the agreement, and having regard to the fact that Sears still wished to open stand-alone furniture stores, Sears opened its store under the name "Sears Whole Home Furniture Store". Also, according to the defendants, Sears withdrew or arranged for Sears Roebuck to withdraw the pending trademarks application.
[14]
According to the plaintiff, on November 2, 1995, Mr. Grontis, a licensed private investigator, telephoned the Sears Whole Home Furniture Store in Kitchener, Ontario. When the telephone was answered by a woman saying "Sears Whole Home", Grontis asked "Is this Sears Homelife?" The woman replied "Yes it is". (supplementary affidavit of George Grontis). The woman who answered the telephone was Shirley Worton. In her affidavit, Ms. Worton indicated she must have been the person referred to in the supplementary Grontis affidavit and that she had no recollection of the telephone conversation. Ms. Worton also stated that if asked whether her store was the "Sears Homelife Furniture Store", she would deny that the store was the "Sears Homelife Furniture Store" (affidavit of Shirley Worton).
[15]
In support of their application for summary judgment, the defendants submit that the defendants, particulary Sears, have never used the trademark "Sears Homelife Furniture Store" in association with retail furniture store services or otherwise and that the defendants no longer have any intention to use the trademark in Canada. As such, there is no reasonable basis for the plaintiff to continue or want to continue the action against the defendants. The defendants also submit that there is no evidence of passing off, no evidence as to damage and, therefore, there is no need for a trial.
[16]
The defendants maintain that not only has there been no use of the trademark, there has been no allegation of use in the statement of claim. According to the defendants, all that the plaintiff has asserted is that the use of the "Sears Homelife Furniture Store" will be confusing. The defendants argue the plaintiff is not pleading that the announced intent would be infringement. Moreover, even if this were pleaded, there would still be no infringement because there are no services since the store had not opened.
[17]
With respect to the passing off action, the defendants note that the plaintiff has asserted, by virtue of the defendants' announced intent, that the defendants are directing public attention to their wares and services and business in such a way as to cause confusion. However, the defendants no longer intend on using the trademark. As such, the defendants maintain, and I agree, that to the extent the plaintiff's action is founded on a threat that no longer exists, the cause of action can also no longer exist. The defendants also maintain there is no evidence as to damage.
[18]
The plaintiff's position is that this is not an appropriate case for summary judgment. In support of its position the plaintiff referred me to the agreement between the parties, which provides that the matter is to go to trial and that there is to be a determination as to whether Sears would be allowed to use the plaintiff's "Homelife" trademark in Canada. The plaintiff also notes there is still the issue of damages that may have been occasioned by the defendants' activities prior to the agreement to be determined.
[19]
The plaintiff maintains there is evidence before the court establishing the infringement, passing off and/or directing the public's attention to Sears' services.
[20]
The plaintiff also maintains there is a basis for a "quia timet" action.
[21]
The plaintiff further submits that this is not a case for summary judgment because there are credibility issues present and, as such, the conflict in the evidence should be resolved by the trier of fact once viva voce evidence has been presented.
[22]
Portions of rule 432.1 and following are reproduced below:
"432.1(1) A plaintiff may, after the defendant has filed a defence, or earlier with leave of the court, and at any time prior to the fixing of the time prior to the fixing of the time and date for trial, make a motion to a judge, with supporting affidavit material or other evidence, for summary judgment on all or part of the claim in the statement of claim.
. . . . .
"432.2(1) In response to affidavit material or other evidence supporting a motion for summary judgment, a responding party may not rest on the mere allegations or denials of the party's pleadings, but must set out, in affidavit material or other evidence, specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial.
. . . . .
"432.3(1) Where a judge is satisfied that there is no genuine issue for trial with respect to a claim or defence, the judge shall grant summary judgment accordingly.
"(2) Where a judge is satisfied that the only genuine issue is the amount to which the moving party is entitled, the judge may order a trial of that issue or grant summary judgment with a reference to determine the amount.
"(3) Where a judge is satisfied that the only genuine issue is a question of law, the judge may determine the question and grant summary judgment accordingly.
"(4) Where a judge decides that there is a genuine issue with respect to a claim or defence, the judge may nevertheless grant summary judgment in favour of any party, either upon issue or generally, unless
(a) the judge is unable on the whole of the evidence to find the facts necessary to decide the questions of fact or law; or
(b) the judge considers that it would be unjust to decide the issues on the motion for summary judgment.
. . . . .
"432.5 Where a summary judgment is refused or is granted only in part, the judge may make an order specifying what material facts are not in dispute and defining the issues to be tried, and may give such directions or impose such terms as the judge deems just, including an order
(a) for payment into court of all or part of the claim;
(b) for security for costs; and
(c) limiting the nature and scope of discovery, if any, to matters not covered by the affidavits filed on the motion for summary judgment and any cross-examination on them, and providing for the use of the affidavits and cross-examination at the trial in the same manner as an examination for discovery.
"432.6 Where it appears that the enforcement of a summary judgment ought to be stayed pending the determination of any other issue in the action or counterclaim, cross-demand or third party claim, a judge may so order on such terms as the judge deems just.
"432.7 Rules 432.1 to 432.6 apply, with such modifications as the circumstances require, to counterclaims, cross-demands and third party claims."
Therefore, rule 432.3(4) provides that summary judgment should not be granted where, on the whole of the evidence, the judge cannot find the necessary facts, for it would be unjust to do so. I am also of the view that summary judgment should only be granted in circumstances where the facts are clear.
[23]
My first concern regarding the defendants' application for summary judgment relates to the fact that there is an agreement in place between the parties providing that this matter proceed to trial in order for a determination to be made as to whether Sears would be allowed to use the plaintiff's "Homelife" mark in Canada and, whether damages may have been occasioned by the defendants' activities prior to October 1995. The defendants also agreed not to use the trademark in question pending the trial or other disposition of the action. In this regard, I note that the agreement provides that:
"WHEREAS Homelife Realty Services Inc. is the owner of a number of registered trademarks for or including Homelife;
"AND WHEREAS, Sears Canada Inc. has indicated that it plans to open stand alone furniture stores in association with the trademark 'Sears Homelife Furniture Store' in Canada;
"AND WHEREAS Sears Roebuck and Co. currently operates stand alone furniture stores and furniture departments in association with the trademark Sears Homelife Department Store in the United States;
"AND WHEREAS Homelife Realty Services Inc. has commenced a trademark infringement action in the Federal Court of Canada naming Sears Canada Inc. and Sears Roebuck and Co. as Defendants (hereinafter the 'action') and filed a motion for an interlocutory injunction and summary judgment in the action;
"AND WHEREAS all parties desire trial and final disposition of the action on an expedited basis;
"NOW THEREFORE, in consideration of the premises and of the terms and conditions hereinafter set forth, the parties agree as follows:
1. That pending trial or other disposition of the action:
(a) Sears Canada Inc. and Sears Roebuck and Co. undertake not to operate any stand alone furniture stores or departments in departments in department stores in Canada in association with any trademark including the word 'Homelife' or any trademark confusingly similar thereto.
(b) Sears Canada Inc. undertakes not to use any trademark including the word 'Homelife' as a trademark in advertising in Canada.
. . . . .
4. An Amended Notice of Motion, in the form attached hereto as Schedule I, will be filed on consent converting the motion for an interlocutory injunction and summary judgment into a motion seeking a court imposed timetable for the action as set out in the motion ..." (Exhibit F to affidavit of Tom Clark).
It was also agreed that this undertaking would not be publicized.
[24]
I am of the view that the parties should be bound by this agreement and, as such, should be able to rely on its terms and conditions. There may have been use by Sears prior to the agreement, namely during the announcement period, and damages may or may not flow from that use. These matters, according to the agreement, are to be determined at trial. I see no reason to interfere with the wishes of the parties as expressed in the provisions and terms of agreement.
[25]
Further, as pointed out by the plaintiff, there are also credibility issues to be determined. Specifically, the conflict in the evidence regarding the telephone conversation between Mr. Grontis and Ms. Worton regarding the alleged use of the term Homelife by Ms. Worton. I agree with the plaintiff's submission that, in the circumstances of this case, with no viva voce evidence before me, the conflict in the evidence should be resolved by the trier of fact, with the benefit of viva voce evidence and cross-examination. I am not prepared nor am I able to make such a determination of credibility without the benefit of viva voce evidence and cross-examination.
[26]
Therefore, given there is an agreement in place calling for the determination on the issue of use of the name "Homelife" by Sears and damages at trial, as well as credibility issues which are best resolved by the trier of fact during the trial, I am of the view that, in the circumstances of this case, it would not be just to grant the defendants' application for summary judgment.
[27]
The plaintiff also expressed some concern regarding the defendants' alleged changed intention with respect to use of the Homelife name and seeks an injunction against the defendants for what it perceives may be use of the trademark "Homelife" sometime in the future. This concern, I believe, is based on the circumstances of this case; the information contained in the affidavits of Sharon Landry, the cross-examination of Sharon Landry and the affidavit of Rudolph Vezer, as well as the telephone conversation between Mr. Grontis and Ms. Worton. Both Ms. Landry and Mr. Vezer are employees of Sears.
[28]
In her affidavit Ms. Landry indicated that Sears no longer intends to commence use of the trademark in association with furniture retail stores or "otherwise in the foreseeable future". She also indicated that, similarly, Sears no longer intends to use any trademark which includes the word "Homelife" in Canada in association with such services in the foreseeable future. She added that it was Sears' present intent to continue, for the foreseeable future, to only use the name "Sears Whole Home Furniture Store". The plaintiff was concerned that Ms. Landry expressed herself in terms of the present and foreseeable and did not state "not at all" with respect to the use of the trademark by Sears. When asked, on cross-examination, to confirm that the defendants were expressly reserving the right, at some point in the future, to use the Homelife name, Ms. Landry responded:
"I don't think it's a question of specifically reserving itself the right, I think it is a matter of not knowing what the future holds beyond today, and to make a definitive statement is probably worse than making a statement here at all." (Transcript of cross-examination of Sharon Landry, page 149)
Mr. Vezer indicated in his affidavit that there is no present intent on behalf of Sears to use any trademark including the word "Homelife" in Canada. Any such intent was abandoned by Sears, since the use that would have been made of the "Sears Homelife" trademark in Canada by Sears Roebuck would have been through Sears. Further, Sears Roebuck no longer has any intent to use the mark in Canada.
[29]
The plaintiff argued that this court has the jurisdiction to grant an injunction where there is a reasonable apprehension, or a basis for a reasonable apprehension, that there would be use by Sears of the trademark containing the word "Homelife". In effect, the plaintiff has requested that this court grant an injunction based on a possibility of an event occurring sometime in the future.
[30]
In further support of its position, the plaintiff referred me to the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  differing phrases have been used in describing circumstances in which mandatory injunction and 'quia timet' injunctions will be granted ... The degree of probability of future injury is not an absolute standard; what is to be carried out is justice between the parties, having regard to all the relevant circumstances."
[31]
With respect, after reviewing the jurisprudence, I am satisfied that this court needs more than just a reasonable basis to grant a 'quia timet' injunction. In this regard, I note specifically the comments of Denault, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), at p. 80:
"The second prerequisite in the granting of an interlocutory injunction requires the applicants to demonstrate that they will suffer irreparable harm for which damages would not be an appropriate remedy if the injunction were refused ... Furthermore, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (C.A.), Mr. Justice Hugessen held that, with respect to the second branch of the test '[i]t is the likelihood of harm, not its futurity, which is the touchstone'."
[32]
In terms of the circumstances of this case, the parties have an agreement which provides that the defendants will not use the trademark containing the word Homelife until the trial or until the final disposition of the matter. The question of damages relating to the announcement by Sears of the use of the Homelife name from April to July 1995 is also to be determined at trial. Further, I am satisfied, based on the evidence before me that the defendants have followed through with their intention as expressed in the agreement, with respect to not using the Homelife name.
[33]
After reviewing the evidence, I am of the opinion, having regard to all the circumstances of the case at bar, including the highly speculative nature of the plaintiff's request, that there is no basis upon which to grant the plaintiff's injunction. The defendants have clearly stated that, at the present time and for the foreseeable future, they do not intend to use the trademark "Homelife". Therefore, this issue, the issuance of an injunction to prevent some event in the future, the use of the word Homelife by the defendants, need not be determined at trial.
[34]
Therefore, for the reasons noted above, the defendants' application for summary judgment is dismissed, with costs against the defendants.
[35]
The plaintiff's request for an injunction is denied.
[36]
The defendants' application to amend the statement of defence is allowed. Costs to be paid to the plaintiff in the amount of $400.00.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Janette Blue/slm
[End of document]