[1]
MacKay, J.
: This is an application on behalf of the Minister for judicial review of a unanimous decision of a three member panel of the Convention Refugee Determination Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board (the "CRDD" or the "tribunal"), dated May 25, 1994. That decision dismissed an application by the Minister responsible, who at the time was the Secretary of State for Canada but is now the Minister of Citizenship and Immigration, made pursuant to s. 69.2 of the
Immigration Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2 as amended, (the "
Act
"), that the CRDD reconsider and vacate an earlier decision, dated January 9, 1992, whereby it was determined that the respondent is a Convention refugee.
[2]
Subsections 69.2(2) to (5) of the
Act
provide:
"(2) The Minister may, with leave of the Chairperson, make an application to the Refugee Division to reconsider and vacate any determination made under this Act or the regulations that a person is a Convention refugee on the ground that the determination was obtained by fraudulent means or misrepresentation, suppression or concealment of any material fact, whether exercised or made by that person or any other person.
"(3) An application to the Chairperson for leave to apply to the Refugee Division under subs. (2) shall be made ex parte and in writing and the Chairperson may grant that leave if the Chairperson is satisfied that evidence exists that, if it had been known to the Refugee Division, could have resulted in a different determination.
"(4) An application to the Refugee Division under this section shall be instituted by filing, in the manner and form prescribed by the rules of the Board, a notice of application with the Refugee Division.
"(5) Where a notice of application is filed with the Refugee Division pursuant to subs. (4), the Minister shall forthwith send a copy of the notice to the person who is the subject of the application."
Background
[3]
On January 9, 1992, the CRDD determined the respondent to be a Convention refugee. On February 17, 1993, the Chairperson of the IRB granted the Minister leave to make application pursuant to s. 69.2(3) of the
Act
for reconsideration of the decision that the respondent is a Convention refugee. In support of the application to the CRDD the applicant filed a declaration made by Mr. William MacIntyre, dated January 31, 1994, with attachments, including a statutory declaration made by Mr. Laurent Beaulieu, dated July 9, 1992.
[4]
On May 25, 1995, three members of the CRDD appointed to consider the Minister's application heard the matter. Counsel for both parties met with the tribunal in a brief conference before the hearing. When the hearing opened, the presiding member summarized issues that had been briefly discussed, including the compellability of the respondent to testify as a witness called by the applicant Minister and the admissibility of the documents relied upon by the Minister in support of the application. In terms of procedure he indicated the Minister would be invited to establish whether there had been misrepresentation or concealment of a material fact, and if so whether any such fact would be likely to vary the determination originally made. Those are the grounds the Minister must establish, pursuant to ss. 69.2(2) and 69.2(3). If that basis were laid, the respondent would then be given the opportunity to address the issues raised by the evidence adduced on behalf of the Minister.
[5]
At the hearing, without having led any other evidence, counsel for the Minister sought to call the respondent as a witness, but counsel for the respondent objected on the ground that the respondent was not a "compellable" witness for the Minister, in the circumstances of the case and because the application to vacate the earlier decision was "prosecutorial" in nature. The respondent had not been informed prior to the hearing that he would be called to testify by the Minister, and by his affidavit the respondent avers that he was not given any notice, even at the hearing, of matters that counsel for the Minister proposed to ask if he were to testify.
[6]
The tribunal agreed with the representations on behalf of the respondent who then did not testify at the hearing. No witnesses were called on behalf of the Minister. The evidence in support of the application was documentary, the declarations of Messrs. MacIntyre and Beaulieu, which had originally been presented in support of the Minister's application that the original finding, that the respondent is a refugee, be vacated.
[7]
A copy of those documents had apparently been sent to the respondent in advance of the hearing, as was notice of the time of hearing. As we have seen, the respondent had no other information about the Minister's concerns in advance of the hearing, and when counsel for the Minister sought to call the respondent to testify, no prior indication of the questions which might be asked of him was given. By affidavit in support of this application for judicial review, then-counsel for the Minister indicated that questions intended to be asked would have concerned the respondent's duration of residence and his status in Egypt, before he had come to Canada.
[8]
Counsel for the respondent objected at the hearing to the admission of the declarations of Messrs. MacIntyre and Beaulieu, since there was no proper grounding or explanation of the bases of their production. One of the declarations was said to contain internal inconsistencies, and the declarants were not available at the hearing for cross-examination. Although the primary documents in question, the two declarations, were admitted by the tribunal, some of the documents appended as exhibits were found not to be admissible. Some were not legible, the origin or nature of others was not clear or explained in any way. Ultimately the tribunal gave the declarations little or no weight although they and copies of immigration documents completed earlier by the respondent, were admitted.
[9]
Counsel for the respondent had not requested in advance of the hearing an opportunity to cross-examine the declarants at the hearing and the tribunal accepted that the respondent had no obligation to request that opportunity. Indeed, the tribunal noted it might have been expected by the respondent that one or both of those persons would be available at the hearing. If the respondent requested, the chairperson indicated, the tribunal would be prepared to adjourn to permit cross-examination. No such request was made. Moreover, counsel for the applicant Minister did not request adjournment.
[10]
The presiding member of the tribunal reviewed the evidence before the tribunal and concluded that the allegations of the Minister concerning discrepancies between information in the respondent's Personal Information Form and his application for permanent residence on the one hand, and on the other hand information said by the declarations of Messrs. MacIntyre and Beaulieu to be available to the Minister which was supportable on the documents admitted, were such that there was not evidence that would cause the original panel, which determined the respondent to be a Convention refugee, to vary its finding. Thus the Minister's application, to vacate the original finding, was dismissed.
[11]
It is worth note that the presiding member of the panel identified, and had agreement of counsel for the applicant, that the alleged misrepresentations of the respondent, said to arise from different statements he had made at different times, in his Personal Information Forms and his application for permanent residence, concerned the following matters: his previous employment; his date of birth, given as January 1, 1961 and again as April 1, 1961; his nationality, once claimed as Ethiopian and once claimed as stateless; and whether he had a passport, once said to have a Somali passport, once said to have none. The tribunal concluded that the differences reported for his previous employment and his date of birth were not significant for the basis of his refugee claim. The passport issue was explicable, his claim to be a refugee was related to both Somalia and Ethiopia, since he claimed to be of Somali-Ethiopian nationality, born in Ethiopia. There was an added issue of concern to the Minister, about the applicant's resident status in Egypt which arose from the declaration of Mr. Beaulieu. In the tribunal's view none of these factors would be likely to cause the original panel to vary its determination that the respondent is a Convention refugee. Thus on the evidence before the tribunal it concluded the Minister did not meet the requirements established by ss. 69.2(2) and 69.2(3).
[12]
The other members of the tribunal indicated their agreement with the presiding member who indicated he would order a transcript of the reasons he provided orally, would edit that and provide the edited reasons to the parties. Thereafter, before that step was completed, the presiding member and a second member of the tribunal left the CRDD. A partial transcript of the hearing, including a record of the tribunal members' agreement on disposition of the matter, with a covering memorandum from the third member of the panel, who continued to be a member of the CRDD, became the decision of the CRDD in the matter, and was accepted as such by the parties for purposes of this application for judicial review.
The Issues
[13]
The issues raised as stated by the applicant are whether the tribunal erred in law and breached principles of natural justice,
(a) In finding that the hearing to vacate a determination that the respondent was a Convention refugee was "prosecutorial" in nature and therefore the respondent was not a compellable witness.
(b) In concluding that the respondent was under no obligation to advise the applicant in advance that he wished to cross-examine Mr. MacIntyre and Mr. Beaulieu.
(c) In failing to provide the applicant with a reasonable opportunity to make representations with respect to the Tribunal's "specialized knowledge" in respect of documents submitted in support of the application to redetermine and vacate.
Compellability Of The Respondent
[14]
Because the tribunal refused to compel the respondent to testify when counsel for the Minister sought to call him, it is contended that the applicant was denied an opportunity to bring forth evidence. That evidence would have related to the claim that the respondent had concealed a material fact in his claim to refugee status, that is, concerning his resident status in Egypt. Had he been compelled to testify, the Minister would then have had opportunity to argue that evidence of the respondent's resident status in Egypt, if known at the time of the original hearing, would have permitted the Minister to intervene and to argue that pursuant to Article 1, section E of the United Nations Convention on the Status of Refugees, the respondent was not eligible to claim refugee status in Canada. On that ground it would have been argued before the tribunal that the original decision should be vacated.
[15]
Further, it is urged that the tribunal erred when it determined that the hearing before it was "prosecutorial"; rather these proceedings are civil in nature, not criminal. Generally parties to a civil action are both competent and compellable to give evidence at the request of any other party to the proceedings. ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  of Evidence in Canada
, (1992, Butterworths Toronto and Vancouver) at p. 618.
[16]
It is not seriously disputed that the tribunal has the general authority to compel the respondent to be a witness pursuant to s. 67(2) of the
Act
which provides that the CRDD and each member of it has the powers and authority of a commissioner appointed under Part I of the
Inquiries Act
. The applicant also relies on s. 69.3(1) of the
Act
which provides that where an application is made under s. 69.2, as in this case, the CRDD "shall afford the Minister and that person a reasonable opportunity to present evidence, cross-examine witnesses and make representations". In
Minister of Employment and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), Mr. Justice Marceau, speaking for the court, in relation to then s. 46(3) which related to the powers of a credible basis panel, and which was comparable in wording to the current s. 69.3(1), held that the panel had acted beyond its jurisdiction when it denied opportunity for the Minister's representative to cross-examine a claimant on his Personal Information Form at a hearing before the credible basis tribunal. It is urged by counsel for the applicant that the rationale in
Leal
is applicable to this case.
[17]
I am not persuaded that the tribunal in this case erred in law by declining to compel the respondent to testify when counsel for the Minister sought to call him as a witness, without having introduced any evidence before the tribunal. Apparently the respondent was to be the only witness called on behalf of the Minister. The tribunal concluded that at the time counsel sought to call the respondent there was no evidence before the tribunal itself. The documentary evidence relied on by the Minister and included as material in support of the Minister's application under s. 69.2, had not at that stage been formally introduced to the tribunal. In a number of respects, noted in the transcript by the presiding member's comments, documents included in that selection, appended as exhibits to documents described as statutory declarations, were subsequently found by the tribunal to be unsatisfactory as evidence before it, in part because no proper foundation for the origin or preparation of the documents was provided either by oral testimony, or in the text of the statutory declarations. In sum the documentary evidence raised questions both for the tribunal and for counsel for the respondent. It had not been introduced and dealt with before counsel for the applicant sought to call the respondent.
[18]
My reading of the transcript does not indicate that the tribunal itself described the nature of the proceedings before it as "prosecutorial", although it did use that adjective in referring to argument advanced by counsel for the respondent. It did, however, accept counsel's suggestion that the purpose of the process was punitive, in the sense that its purpose is the removal of a benefit. At the hearing before me counsel for the respondent argued that more than the removal of a benefit is at stake. Since the respondent, having been found to be a Convention refugee has a statutory right to remain in Canada except as provided by law (s. 4(2.1) of the
Act
), proceedings under s. 69.2 for determination of cessation of refugee status would deprive the respondent of that right to remain. In these circumstances, counsel for the respondent urged that the burden on the Minister established under s. 69.2 ought to require that the Minister's case be established by evidence other than that which might be provided by oral testimony of the respondent. In my opinion, the tribunal reached its decision not to compel the respondent to testify in the circumstances of this case largely on grounds of fairness in procedure. The tribunal did recognize that in certain other circumstances a witness might be compelled, for example in the case of persons seeking admission to Canada. In this context the presiding member said, in part:
"Clearly, in this particular situation, it would seem to me that the Minister has initiated this process; the Minister must have had reason to seek the vacation, and that, that evidence would be evidence other than evidence that was provided by Mr. Haji-Dodi, with the exception, of course, of evidence that he may have provided in the original hearing, or in terms of his original claim.
"So, to that extent, any evidence that Mr. Haji-Dodi may have provided is already before us, and I can see of no reason why it would be necessary to have the Minister's representative call Mr. Haji-Dodi at this point in time, to seek further evidence, unless the Minister was on a fishing expedition. If that's the case, then I have some serious reservations about allowing the Minister's representative to do that."
[19]
Counsel for the applicant referred to
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R.(2d) 234 (T.D.), per Richard, J., and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R.(2d) 71 (T.D.), per Strayer, J., concerning the compellability of witnesses. In both cases the court was concerned with the circumstance of a foreign citizen in Canada who was ordered deported following determination by an adjudicator that he had committed certain crimes abroad which rendered him a member of an inadmissible class under the
Act
. The first of the decisions noted above dealt with his application for judicial review and the second with an application for a stay of the deportation order. In both cases the compellability of the foreign national as a witness before the adjudicator was raised and in both cases the court determined that the adjudicator, acting under the
Act
to compel the person concerned to testify, had not erred in law. The proceedings before the adjudicator are civil, not criminal, in nature and the person subject to the hearing process may be compelled to testify.
[20]
That of course is not the issue in this case. Rather, the issue is whether the tribunal here erred by not compelling the respondent to testify when the Minister sought to call the respondent as a witness. In my opinion, the tribunal did not err in law in determining, as a matter of its own proceedings in accord with s. 67(2) of the
Act
, that the respondent should not be compelled to testify in circumstances where no evidence had been presented at the hearing by the Minister, and documentary evidence presented in support of the application in advance of the hearing was not entirely satisfactory from the perspective of the tribunal.
Cross-examination Of Immigration
Officials
[21]
The second issue raised by the applicant concerns the conclusion of the tribunal that the respondent was under no obligation to advise the Minister in advance of the hearing that he wished to cross-examine immigration officers whose statutory declarations were included in the documentary evidence. It is said that the tribunal relied on
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), in stating that the respondent had not had an opportunity to respond to the applicant's case. I do not read the comments of the presiding member this way, rather, he referred to the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case as underlining the need for fairness in the proceedings before the tribunal. Ultimately the presiding member did comment, in part:
"... Counsel [for the respondent] is under no obligation to advise the department, the Minister, that she would like to have the individuals who prepared the declarations or affidavits made available. I think it's a reasonable assumption on Counsel's part to expect these persons to be present, and if they are not present, then counsel can simply make a motion for an adjournment, until such time as the individual is produced, so that they may be cross-examined.
"In cases where that is not possible, then the effect of that document and the weight of that document, is tempered by the lack of cross-examination; the lack of testing the veracity of the document. It would be appropriate for a panel, in that situation, to assign the weight or to mitigate, to reduce the significance of the document ..."
[22]
In written submissions for the applicant it is submitted:
"38. In the case at bar the respondent was provided with the evidence of the applicant on February 1, 1994. The respondent had several months to provide documentary evidence to rebut the evidence provided by the respondent. Further, the respondent had an opportunity at the hearing to provide viva voce evidence to rebut the evidence provided by the applicant. It is therefore submitted that the need to cross-examine Mr. MacIntyre and Mr. Beaulieu was not present in the case at bar. However, if it was held that such cross-examination may be warranted it is submitted that fairness dictates that the applicant be provided with at least a minimum of advanced notice in order to allow for submissions to be made in response to the request for cross-examination, or in the alternative to locate and prepare the declarants for cross-examination.
"39. Finally, given that the Tribunal was of the opinion that the documentary evidence provided by the applicant was of slight probative value because the declarant shad [sic] not been cross-examined, the Tribunal should have followed its own stated procedure and simply adjourned the hearing to allow for the cross-examinations to occur."
[23]
In my opinion, the respondent was free to deal with the application by the Minister as he saw fit, not as counsel for the Minister may have desired. He was under no obligation to provide documentary evidence or to provide viva voce evidence, unless compelled by the tribunal. He was free to seek to cross-examine the declarants in advance of the hearing just as he would have been as a party to other proceedings before the court in dealing with affidavits produced by the other side, but he was not bound to do so. The Minister as applicant, having put forward the declarations, or affidavits, of members of staff should be prepared to produce those declarants or affiants for cross-examination if the other side requests. Where there is no request by the respondent the tribunal is under no obligation to direct that there be cross-examination in relation to documentary evidence it found questionable before it determined what, of the evidence adduced by the Minister, would be admitted and what weight it would have.
[24]
Those determinations are essentially for the tribunal. In this case its determinations cannot be said to be unreasonable and there is no basis on which this court should intervene on this ground.
Specialized Knowledge
[25]
The applicant's third issue concerns specialized knowledge of the tribunal to which reference was made by the presiding member. It is urged that s. 68(5) of the
Act
, and jurisprudence of this court, require notification of the tribunal's intent to rely on its "specialized knowledge" and an opportunity for comment upon it, which was here not done. Counsel for both parties agreed that this was a subsidiary issue. In my view it is not an issue of any significance for these proceedings. The specialized knowledge referred to by the presiding member, concerning an "abundance of fraudulent or less-than-genuine travel documents reportedly issued by the government of Somalia, ... a common occurrence", is not a factor which gave rise to any factual or legal basis upon which the determination by the tribunal depends.
Conclusion
[26]
For the reasons set out, this application for judicial review is dismissed. In my view, the evidentiary bases in documents in support of the Minister's application ought to have been better assembled and evidence on behalf of the Minister should have been introduced, at least to establish a prima facie case to which the respondent might be expected to reply. Here he was not called upon to respond. The tribunal concluded that no proper case had been established on behalf of the Minister requiring a reply by the respondent. In the circumstances of this case, I cannot conclude that the tribunal erred in law in its determination.
[27]
Counsel for the applicant submitted that the following question be certified pursuant to s. 83(1) of the
Act
for consideration by the Court of Appeal.
"Is a person who is subject to a hearing pursuant to s. 69.3 of the
Immigration Act
to reconsider and vacate an earlier determination of the Refugee Division that the person was a Convention refugee, a compellable witness at that hearing?"
[28]
In my view, the question proposed does not relate to the facts of this case in a manner which would lead to its disposition on appeal. My reasons should not be interpreted as indicating that a person who is subject to a hearing pursuant to s. 69.3 of the
Immigration Act
is not a compellable witness at the hearing. Where the tribunal determines that no case has been made out on behalf of the Minister at the time counsel seeks to call the person who is subject to the hearing to give evidence, the tribunal does not err if it determines at that stage that that person ought not to be compelled to testify. There may be additional factors that would support a tribunal's decision, as in this case where the person subject to the hearing has no advance notice before the hearing that the Minister will call him or her to testify, and no notice of areas of questioning. In sum, my determination depends very much upon the facts of this particular case. In these circumstances, any question for determination of an appeal would depend upon the facts of this particular case and would not be "a serious question of general importance" within the meaning of s. 83(1) of the
Act
. In the circumstances, no question is certified.
[29]
Upon oral motion of the applicant at the hearing, I directed that the applicant be the Minister of Citizenship and Immigration. The order now issued so provides and further, that the style of cause be as it is set out at the commencement of these Reasons and in the accompanying Order.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Kelli A. Simmonds/saf
[End of document]