[1]
Joyal, J.
: This Court is asked to intervene in the matter of a decision by an immigration officer under the Refugee Claims Backlog Regulations refusing to grant permanent landing to the applicant. The applicant submits that this decision should be quashed and a new hearing ordered.
Background
[2]
The issue arises from the enactment in 1986 of new immigration regulations to deal with the backlog of some 23,000 people in Canada claiming refugee status. Over the years, the system adopted to deal with these people became bogged down. The administrative and deliberative machinery could not effectively and expeditiously deal with them. In the meantime, these people whose ultimate fate would not be known for some time had nevertheless to survive. It was a case of primo vivere. They had to look after themselves. They had to find jobs, usually of the casual labour variety as they possessed no work permit. They often had to rely on friends, or family, or other agencies for support. Later on, to an increasing measure, work permits were granted and they could then enter the more legitimate or more orthodox labour market. Some of them, and indeed according to the evidence before me, most of them became slowly and imperceptibly integrated in the Canadian mosaic. The uncertainty of their status became submerged by other preoccupations and the anxiety which was earlier visited upon them receded. Nevertheless, the ambiguity persisted.
[3]
Concurrently, as far as the immigration authorities were concerned, policy issues dealing with the determination of refugee status and Canadian recognition of international conventions in that regard had to face these new realities. In essence, the problem facing the immigration authorities was continually spiralling down, not up. Something had to be done with the backlog.
[4]
The authorities decided upon an exceptional and pragmatic measure. A one-stop procedure was adopted. Anyone claiming refugee status and defined as a member of the refugee backlog could apply to an immigration officer who, upon being satisfied that the applicant had become established in Canada or had the potential to do so, could grant the applicant permanent landing.
[5]
The procedure was to be quick and expeditious. It had concern for the realities of the situation. These refugee claimants were in Canada, many of them for many years. If experience indicated that the integration into Canadian life of a particular applicant had taken root or that the history of his general activities since his arrival in Canada provided some evidence of his becoming so, a simple fiat by an immigration officer would give him permanent landing.
[6]
The genus of this policy was simple and simply expressed. The application of the policy, however, was something else, keeping in mind that the scheme contemplated had to keep a precarious balance between the twin spires of expediency and fairness.
[7]
The first problem of application was the tremendous discretion given an immigration officer. As we shall see, the expression "successful establishment" in Canada or the potential of an applicant to "successfully establish himself in Canada" invites strong subjective considerations dependent in large measure on the perceptions and values of the individual immigration officer.
[8]
The second problem was to find a formula whereby common indicia would be used to direct the immigration officer's mind to the main consideration which should apply in his determination.
[9]
The third problem was to assure to the measure possible that the judgment call on any particular applicant, no matter his race, colour or creed, would conform to the judgment call on all applicants and that, again to the measure possible, that same degree of conformity would apply in relative terms, to various regions of the country and to various individual immigration officers.
The Regulations
[10]
The whole scheme took on the title of Administrative Review Project and its statutory base was established by the coming into force on August 3, 1986 of the Refugee Claims Backlog Regulations, P.C. 1986-1531 (the "Regulations").
[11]
A quick analysis of these Regulations provides the following:
1. Section 3 provides for a member of the refugee claims backlog to apply to an immigration officer for permanent landing. The applicant is exempt from the normal passport and immigrant visa requirement.
2. Section 5 gives discretion to an immigration officer to determine if an applicant has become successfully established in Canada or has the potential to become so. To make that determination, the immigration officer has to consider two sets of factors.
(1) the first set, under section 5(1) reads as follows:
"5(1)(a) the member's stability in employment in Canada;
(b) the length of time the member has been employed in relation to the time he has spent in Canada;
(c) the frequency of and reasons for changes in employment by the member;
(d) the present income and future income prospects of the member's present employment; and
(e) the member's family obligations."
(2) the second set of factors, listed under section 5(2), applies when the immigration officer is unable to make a determination under section 5(1) and when he must consider the applicant's potential to successfully establish himself in Canada; in such event the factors are:
"5(2)(a) the member's work history and experience in his country of former residence in an occupation that he is prepared to follow in Canada:
(b) the member's occupational skills that are likely to facilitate his absorption into the Canadian labour market;
(c) the member's educational level and the impact of that level on his employment prospects;
(d) the member's ability to communicate in one of Canada's official languages;
(e) the presence in Canada of a relative who is willing and able to provide financial and other assistance to the member while he is establishing himself in Canada;
(f) the member's personal suitability to become successfully established in Canada, based on his adaptability, motivation, initiative, resourcefulness and similar qualities; and
(g) the member's family obligations."
3. Section 6 is the authority given to an immigration officer to grant landing if in his opinion based on the factors in section 5, the applicant is or is likely to become successfully established in Canada.
4. Section 7 provides another route to becoming permanently landed. If the applicant has a relative in Canada who is a Canadian citizen or is permanently landed and who comes within the family class of persons described therein, and such relative provides the kind of undertaking which in the opinion of the immigration officer will be fulfilled, the factors set out in section 5 need not apply and landing may be granted to the applicant. The full text of section 7 is as follows:
"7(1) Notwithstanding paragraph 6(1)(b), an immigration officer may grant landing to a member of the refugee claims backlog and his dependants if
(a) the member is, with respect to a Canadian citizen or permanent resident who is at least 18 years of age and is residing in Canada at the time an application for landing is made pursuant to section 3 by the member of the refugee claims backlog,
(i) the spouse,
(ii) the unmarried son or daughter who was less than
(A) 21 years of age on May 21, 1986, and
(B) 23 years of age at the time of the decision of the immigration officer on the application for landing,
(iii) the father, mother, grandfather or grandmother,
(iv) the brother, sister, nephew, niece, grandson or granddaughter who is an orphan, is unmarried and was, on May 21, 1986, under 18 years of age;
(b) the Canadian citizen or permanent resident described in paragraph (a)
(i) has given an undertaking,
(ii) subject to subsection (3), is likely, in the opinion of the immigration officer, to fulfil the undertaking referred to in subparagraph (i), and
(iii) is not in default in respect of any obligations assumed by him under any other undertaking given by him, including an undertaking given under the Immigration Regulations, 1978;
(c) where the member is
(i) a son or daughter described in subparagraph (a)(ii) who was adopted outside of Canada by the Canadian citizen or permanent resident described in paragraph (a) while the Canadian citizen or permanent resident was residing in Canada, or
(ii) an orphan described in subparagraph (a)(iv),
the child welfare authority of the government of the province in which the member intends to reside has stated in writing that it has no objection to proposed arrangements for the reception and care of the member.
"7(2) For the purpose of subparagraph (1)(b)(ii), the immigration officer shall take into account the factor set out in Schedule IV to the Immigration Regulations, 1978.
"7(3) Subparagraph (1)(b)(ii) does not apply where
(a) the member of the refugee claims backlog described in subsection (1) who makes an application for landing is
(i) the spouse of the Canadian citizen or permanent resident and does not have any accompanying sons or daughters under 21 years of age who have issue at the time the Canadian citizen or permanent resident gave the undertaking referred to in subparagraph (1)(b)(i), or
(ii) a son or daughter described in subparagraph (1)(a)(ii) who does not have any issue; or
(b) the Minister has, pursuant to section 109 of the Act, entered into an agreement with the government of the province in which the Canadian citizen or permanent resident resides and the member of the refugee claims backlog intends to reside, and an official designated by the government of that province has satisfied himself as required by the laws of that province that the Canadian citizen or permanent resident will be able to fulfil the undertaking referred to in subparagraph (1)(b)(i).
"7(4) Notwithstanding subparagraph (1)(a)(i), a member of the refugee claims backlog shall not be granted landing as the spouse of a Canadian citizen or a permanent resident where he entered into the marriage primarily for the purpose of gaining admission to Canada and not with the intention of residing permanently with his spouse."
[12]
It will be noted that the factors to be considered under section 5 of the Regulations are of two varieties. The first set imposes what are substantially hard economic considerations. They are meant to establish a factual test to the determination of the question of successful establishment in Canada.
[13]
The second set of factors, however, imposes in my view a more speculative or generic test to that determination. One finds issues relating to the
likelihood
that occupational skills will
facilitate
the applicant's absorption into the Canadian labour market; the
impact
of the level of education on employment
prospects
; issues of
adaptability
,
motivation
,
initative
,
resourcefulness
to determine personal
suitability
, all of them criteria which cannot readily be made the subject of scientific analysis. These are tests which impose a more subjective application of an immigration officer's discretion. It also opens wide the door to critical analysis of comparables as between individual immigration officers and as between individual applicants. In other words, the process adopted for an expedient determination has within it the seeds of discontent.
The Guidelines
[14]
To assure in the measure possible a fair application of the Regulations to each applicant and to assist immigration officers in that respect, the respondents issued some guidelines. These guidelines are contained in Operations Memorandum No. IE 136 dated September 2, 1986. These guidelines include the following:
1. Procedures respecting priority processing and initial determination of those refugees who come within the ambit of the Regulations or are excluded from them.
2. Administrative requirements prior to a hearing of any application.
3. Guidelines on the application of the criteria to determine successful establishment in Canada pursuant to section 5(1) of the Regulations.
4. Guidelines on the application of criteria to determine potentially successful establishment in Canada pursuant to section 5(2).
5. Situations involving humanitarian and compassionate considerations.
[15]
Pertinent to the issue before me are the guidelines relating to the application of the factors or criteria set out in section 5 of the Regulations.
The Facts
[16]
The applicant was born in Guyana in 1961. Her maiden name was Maharani Bowen. She attended school and obtained a diploma equivalent to grade 10. She came to Canada on a visitor's visa in 1979. She went back to Guyana in 1980 and returned to Canada in 1981. She has been in Canada ever since. There is no dispute that she comes within the class of refugees covered by the Regulations.
[17]
In 1983, she married Bruce Robins. The couple lived together only briefly and separated soon after. She has no children.
[18]
When originally residing in Canada in the period of 1979-80, she was employed as a babysitter for various families. For some two years following her return to Canada in 1981, she did babysitting for her cousin in Toronto. Her salary was $50 per week. In September 1985, she took employment with Conross Corporation in Agincourt. She earns some $12,480 annually. Her working habits are reported good. She has accumulated bank savings of some $3,000. Her family, with the exception of her brother Vernon who still resides in Guyana, is in Canada. This includes her father and mother, another brother, a younger sister and another sister who is married to a landed immigrant. She lives with her parents in Scarborough.
[19]
On December 12, 1986, the applicant was interviewed by Ms. Halina Lusczcynski, an immigration officer in Toronto, to determine if the applicant could meet the requirements of the Regulations and became permanently landed. The immigration officer determined that the applicant was not successfully established in Canada and did not have the potential for it. The refusal letter dated December 22, 1986 is as follows:
"Ms. Maharani Robins
50 Trudelle Street
Apt. 108
Scarborough, Ontario M1J 1Z3
Dear Ms. Robins
This refers to your application for permanent residence in Canada.
Your application has been carefully assessed against the criteria of the Administrative Review Project. I regret to inform you that your application has been refused.
In addition to the need to comply with the statutory requirements of the Immigration Act and Regulations, applicants are assessed according to the criteria set out in the Refugee Claims Backlog Regulations. This is for the purpose of determining whether the applicant is established or has the ability to become successfully established in Canada, may be eligible for sponsorship as a member of the family class or may be eligible for favourable consideration based on humanitarian and compassionate grounds.
As you are separated, you do not fall into the 'Family Class'.
Regrettably, after interviewing you on 12 December 1986, I am unable to assess you favourably for the following reasons:
1. Your employment history is brief in comparison to your length of time in Canada.
2. You have no real skills transferable to the Canadian labour market.
3. You have failed to make any attempt to upgrade your employment/education in the seven years that you have been in Canada.
4. You have been dependant on your family for accommodation, support and employment for a considerable length of time.
Due to the above factors, we feel that you are not well-established nor demonstrated your potential for establishment.
It does not appear that undue hardship would be suffered if you had to return to Guyana so you would not fall into the 'Humanitarian and Compassionate' category.
As you have indicated your wish to be considered a Convention Refugee, your claim will be allowed to continue and will be processed on a priority basis.
I realize that you will be disappointed by this decision and regret that it cannot be favourable.
Sincerely,
Signed: H. Luszczynski
H. Luszczynski
Immigration Officer"
[20]
It is from this refusal that the applicant prays this Court to intervene.
The Case For the Applicant
[21]
The applicant's case is based on extensive affidavits and exhibits in support. There is a lengthy affidavit from the applicant herself writing in detail her background and experience in Canada since her arrival here. There are attached as exhibits copy of application for permanent residence, copy of the immigration officer's refusal letter, copy of an eleven page letter addressed by the applicant's counsel to the Administrator of the refugee backlog program in Toronto dated December 14, 1986, copy of the latter's reply dated December 31, 1986, and copy of sundry documents pertaining to the applicant's financial situation, work record and attendant family support.
[22]
In addition, there is a lengthy affidavit from Geraldine Sadoway, a barrister and solicitor practicing immigration law in Toronto and to which there are attached copy of a thirteen page press release of the respondent dated July 3, 1986 giving details of the Administrative Review project, copy of IE 136 containing the guidelines to which I have already referred and including statistical reference material on job opportunities and income levels and finally, copy of the Sixth Report of the House of Commons' Standing Committee on Labour, Employment and Immigration on the subject of the refugee claims backlog dated December 19, 1985 and running through a dozen pages.
[23]
Added to the foregoing is a 68 page transcript of the cross-examination of Ms. Lusczcynski, the immigration officer who conducted the hearing.
[24]
The main thrust of counsel's argument on the applicant's behalf is that the guidelines provided to the immigration officer unduly fetter the latter's discretion in the carrying out of the Administrative Review Project under the Regulations. Counsel refers to the didactic rules governing the factor of stability of employment and to the statistical norms of income levels applied to indicate self-dependency.
[25]
Counsel further alleges that the immigration officer was in error in the following particulars namely in that she discounted the applicant's work experience as a family babysitter; that she equated the applicant's future prospects in terms of her current nonexisting skills and that she discounted the applicant's fifteen month record of stable employment because it fell short of the 18 month guideline.
[26]
As a conclusion, counsel for the applicant urges me to find that the standards imposed by the immigration officer were in conformity with stricter guidelines as against more lenient or more liberal regulatory considerations. The discretion of the immigration officer, she says, is wrongly exercised if it is founded on policy declarations instead of on statutory provisions.
[27]
In support, counsel for the applicant relies on the Federal Court of Appeal decision in Re Maple Lodge Farms Ltd. and Government of Canada et al., 114 D.L.R.(3d) 634, at page 645, on the Supreme Court decision in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at page 208.
The Case for the Respondent
[28]
The main argument advanced by respondents' counsel is that the guidelines do not fetter the immigration's discretion. Nor do they impose standards more onerous than those imposed under the Regulations. Counsel refers to the cross-examination of the immigration officer where it is made clear that all the factors in section 5 of the Regulations, as well as all the various elements surrounding them were properly considered. The weight to be given to any particular factor or individual element is not a matter of law but a matter of weight in deciding which an immigration officer has full discretion.
[29]
Counsel for the respondents cites the Supreme Court decision in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , as authority for the proposition that the duty of the immigration officer is to weigh the evidence and if the evidence is there and it is relevant, the exercise of that officer's discretion is unassailable. Counsel also refers to  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  of statutory discretion. A court's inquiry is only to determine if certain matters taken into account should not have been taken into account or conversely if the authority refused to take into account matters which should have been taken into account. Counsel for the respondents concludes that no error can be found in the immigration officer's decision in that respect.
Findings
[30]
I will say this for appellant's counsel. If her case in attacking the exercise of the immigration officer's discretion be buttressed by founding it on a good set of facts which appeals to more humane than more judicial values, she has admirably succeeded. The applicant's case was a marginal case and the immigration officer admitted as much on cross-examination.
[31]
Counsel for the applicant will concede, however, that it takes more than the exercise of charitable virtues to traverse the issues she has raised before me. Judicial restraint has to be exercised. A court must resist the occupational temptation of coming to its own conclusions on the facts. That is a role to be exercised by the officer on whom the statute has conferred a discretion and judicial interference with it should only be permissible on clear and obvious grounds.
[32]
I have examined closely the material containing the guidelines. These guidelines say a good deal. In fact, one might conclude that they say so much that they end up saying very little. The standards, measures and demonstrations contained thereon are in my mind drafted in complementary terms. In the guidelines applicable to a section 5(1) appraisal, circumspect as against more imperative terms are used, eg. "taking into account" the factors set out in paragraphs (a) to (e); "taking into consideration" a person's financial ability to provide ...; the judgment must be related to the circumstances of the individuals ... and would normally require ...; the existence of assets in Canada may be taken into account.
[33]
Similar observations might be made with respect to the application of factors under section 5(2). The expression "all the factors should be considered together in forming an opinion" is no more than a prosaic reiteration of the section itself. The expression "decisions will be made on a global assessment and not on a strict pass/fail rating of each factor" is more a gentle reminder of what the judgment call should be all about than an oblique attempt to fetter the immigration officer's discretion.
[34]
When the guidelines speak of assessments on occupational skills, and refer to statistical codes, the expressions "are not likely", "would normally", "should consider" attenuate effectively what might otherwise be interpreted as manipulative language.
[35]
I must conclude that the guidelines are neither in substance nor in form mandatory requirements of a nature to circumscribe the Regulations or to unduly prescribe the exercise of an immigration officer's discretion.
[36]
The next issue to be traversed involves an enquiry into the immigration officer's decision itself. This enquiry has already taken place and the result is found in the transcript of her evidence on cross-examination by the applicant's counsel. In this examination, applicant's counsel, with the deft touch of a pathologist, opened wide the anatomy of the decision-making process. The effort was to find some psychogenetic or neurological disease in the immigration officer's decision and in the relative and absolute strength of the factors which had to be considered. In my respectful view, counsel failed to find any. The immigration officer did not misdirect herself and she did not take extraneous matters into account. She did not fail to consider all the material facts and to weigh these facts in accordance with statutory requirements. The immigration officer was simply called upon to make a decision and she made it. It might have been a difficult one to make but it was hers to make.
[37]
Counsel for the applicant will concede that other evidence she submitted to the Court is of little probative value. Some of that evidence was of course most useful in establishing the historical and administrative content of the Regulations and in aiding the Court's perception of it. In dealing with the sum of this evidence, however, I should simply repeat Mr. Justice Mahoney's dictum in The Canadian Human Rights Commission and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  page 1:
"... couched in terms of errors within the ambit of section 28 of the Federal Court Act, [counsel] actually invited the Court to re-try the complaint and to come to different conclusions on the evidence than those reached by the Tribunal and sustained by the Review Tribunal ..."
[38]
No more need be said on that.
Conclusion
[39]
I have gone to some lengths in dealing with the issues before me. I was ably aided in this by counsel for both parties and by the extensive material they put before the Court. It is recognized that the applicant's turn-down puts her back on a holding pattern pending the eventual determination of her refugee claim. Her situation, however, is no worse than it was before.
[40]
It is in the nature of the program instituted under the Regulations that decisions in individual cases be questioned or debated. The burden on an immigration officer is a heavy one and it should not be expected that in the thousands of applications which have to be processed under expeditious conditions, what appears to be similar merits might nevertheless lead to different decisions. The only way to achieve perfection would be by the granting of a general amnesty to all applicants who qualify as members of the refugee claims backlog. Such, however, would not appear to have been the legislator's intention. Nor is it the intention which is clearly expressed in the Regulations.
Order
[41]
A formal order shall issue dismissing the application. In the circumstances, there will be no order as to costs.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/kam
[End of document]