[1]
Rouleau, J.
: This is a motion by the defendants for an order pursuant to rule 419 of the Federal Court Rules striking out the plaintiff's statement of claim on the grounds that the plaintiff lacks the standing necessary to bring the action specified in its statement of claim and that the statement of claim discloses no reasonable cause of action.
[2]
On January 3, 1989, the plaintiff commenced an action in this court by way of statement of claim wherein it seeks a declaration that certain provisions of the Immigration Act, S.C. 1976, c. 52 as amended, An Act to Amend the Immigration Act, 1976, S.C. 1988, c. 35 and An Act to Amend the Immigration Act, 1976 and the Criminal Code, S.C. 1988, c. 36, violate certain of the fundamental rights and freedoms guaranteed by the Charter of Rights and Freedoms and the Bill of Rights and are accordingly of no force and effect.
[3]
The statement of claim is quite lengthy and impugns the constitutional validity of approximately 88 provisions of the above-cited legislation. I am not inclined, in a motion of this nature, to summarize each attack made by the plaintiff. Furthermore, I will be making reference to some of the plaintiff's allegations in the discourse of my reasons. However, by way of introduction I would summarize the plaintiff's allegations in its statement of claim as follows:
Certain sections of the Immigration Act, 1976 contravene the Charter and the Bill of Rights by limiting or denying a person's right to counsel.
Certain sections of the amending legislation contravene the Charter and the Bill of Rights by subjecting specified classes to cruel and unusual punishment.
Certain provisions of the amending legislation contravene the Charter and the Bill of Rights by failing to provide a fair hearing to those making refugee claims in Canada.
Certain provisions of the Immigration Act, 1976 fail to protect a refugee's life, liberty and security of the person thereby contravening the Charter and the Bill of Rights.
Certain provisions of the amending legislation contravene s. 15 of the Charter and s. 1(b) of the Bill of Rights.
[4]
It is the defendants' position that the plaintiff lacks the standing necessary to challenge the constitutional validity of the impugned legislation because the plaintiff is not itself directly affected by the challenged provisions, which apply for the most part to aliens who seek Convention refugee status under the statute. Further, the defendants argue, the plaintiff's attacks are based, in the main, on ss. 7 and 15 of the Charter, that is, on rights which it, as a corporation, does not possess.
[5]
The question which this court must ask, according to the defendant, is whether there is anyone with a more direct interest in launching the challenge than the plaintiff. In the defendants' view, any person to whom the legislation is sought to be applied would be capable of raising the constitutional issues put forward in the statement of claim.
[6]
In addition to these considerations, the defendants maintain that the constitutional validity of several of the provisions attacked by the plaintiff cannot, in any event, be determined in the abstract. Rather, a specific factual setting is required in order to assess whether rights and freedoms have been detrimentally affected by the exercise of the discretionary powers challenged in the statement of claim. Therefore, the defendants submit, the plaintiff's claim lacks concreteness and is not the appropriate subject of an action for declaratory relief.
[7]
In the alternative, the defendants argue that even if the court finds the plaintiff has standing to litigate the issues raised in the statement of claim, most of the allegations should be struck out in any event. The defendants deny that the Immigration Act, 1976 and the amending legislation contravene the Charter and the Bill of Rights by denying a person's right to counsel, by subjecting specified classes to cruel and unusual punishment, by failing to provide a fair hearing to those making refugee claims, or by failing to protect a refugee's life, liberty and security of the person.
[8]
The defendants maintain that there is no indication of any evidence to be raised at trial which would be relevant to argument. Various paragraphs of the statement of claim are not, according to the defendants, supported by any law or any particulars. It is the defendants' submission that there should be sufficient particulars pleaded by the plaintiff in its statement of claim for the defendants to be able to prepare their defence. Since the statement of claim in this case lacks sufficient particularly to create a proper plea, it should be struck out on the grounds that it shows no reasonable cause of action.
[9]
The plaintiff, on the other hand, submits that it meets the criteria for public interest standing as set out by the Supreme Court of Canada in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; [1982] 1 W.W.R. 97; 24 C.R.(3d) 352; 24 C.P.C. 62; 64 C.C.C.(2d) 97; 130 D.L.R.(3d) 588,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 6 A.P.R. 85; 55 D.L.R. (3d) 632, and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ]. It is submitted that the plaintiff is entitled to assert that another party's constitutional rights are violated as was done  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , Thorson, and Borowski as well as in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[10]
Furthermore, the plaintiff argues, there exists no reasonable, effective or practical manner for the class of persons most directly affected by the legislation in question, that is, convention refugees, to raise the constitutional issues raised by the plaintiff in its statement of claim. The most obvious difficulty is that a person directly affected by the legislation is subject to a 72 hour removal. An injunction against a removal order cannot be considered by the court before a minimum of 10 days has elapsed from the time of filing the applicant's materials. Accordingly, by the time any remedy is granted by the court, the harm to the refugee will most likely have already occurred.
[11]
In any event, the plaintiff submits, it is an error on the part of the defendants to assume that all claimants will have access to the courts. In practical terms, a claimant may be unable to retain and instruct counsel within 72 hours.
[12]
It is the plaintiff's position that even if it is assumed that a few "directly affected" refugees could manage to surmount the practical hurdles referred to above and were successful in getting their cases before the courts, obtaining stays permitting them to remain in the country and then challenging the constitutionality of the legislation, the Thorson, McNeil and Borowski decisions make it clear that this is not a bar to the plaintiff having standing. In other words, the plaintiff should be granted standing in order to make an attack on the constitutional validity of the legislation that is unencumbered by the practical difficulties encountered by "directly affected" refugees.
[13]
Finally, on the question of standing, the plaintiff maintains that employees and volunteer members of the plaintiff and its member churches are "directly affected" by those sections of the impugned legislation which impose criminal sanctions on persons who are involved in assisting refugees gain access to the legislative provisions concerning refugee determination. That direct interest is, by itself, sufficient to grant standing to the plaintiff.
[14]
As to the defendants' second argument, that the statement of claim discloses no reasonable cause of action and should be struck, the plaintiff submits that the defendant has failed to satisfy the heavy onus upon them. In order to succeed in a motion to strike out a statement of claim, the court must be satisfied beyond any doubt that the plaintiff's action could not possibly succeed. This, the plaintiff submits, the defendants have failed to do.
[15]
It is further submitted by the plaintiff that if the claim is arguable and has some chance of succeeding, it is not to be struck on the basis that some of the allegations plead bare conclusions of law, unsupported by particulars. If the defendants are of the view that they cannot answer the pleading because they do not know the case to be met, they should have requested particulars pursuant to rule 415. The solution is not, in the plaintiff's view, to strike out the statement of claim on the grounds that it shows no reasonable cause of action.
[16]
I intend to deal first with the issue of standing. All legal systems have had to incur the problem of adjusting conflicts between two aspects of the public interest; the desirability of encouraging individual citizens to participate actively in the enforcement of the law, and the necessity of discouraging the professional litigant to meddle in matters that do not concern him. In attempting to strike an acceptable balance between these two concerns, the courts have, over time, developed certain principles in relation to the issue of locus standi.
[17]
The long standing principle that the Attorney General is the sole representative of the public interest in our courts has been circumscribed greatly by a set of exceptions that have enabled private parties to advance their interpretation of the public interest by engaging in litigation.
[18]
Certainly a private individual has long been able to sue to prevent interference with a right, provided the interference entails an interference with a public right. The courts have often given these exceptions generous construction so as to enable, not only individuals, but also public interest organizations, to bring issues of public interest into the judicial arena.
[19]
In the area of standing to challenge the constitutional validity of legislation, the exception has virtually swallowed the rule and the Supreme Court of Canada has relaxed the requirements for locus standi in litigation of this nature by its decisions  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , Thorson and McNeil. In those cases the court held that the question of standing involves a determination of issues of both fact and law as well as an exercise of judicial discretion. The exercise of the court's discretion to grant standing in an action for a declaration that legislation is invalid depends upon the existence of certain criteria. First, a serious and justiciable issue must be raised in the action; second, the plaintiff must be either directly affected by the legislation or the plaintiff must have a genuine interest in the validity of the legislation; and third, there must be no other reasonable, effective or practical manner in which the issue may be brought before the court.
[20]
In my view the plaintiff has succeeded in demonstrating that it meets the above criteria and should accordingly be granted status.
[21]
To begin with, I accept the plaintiff's contention that a serious question is raised as to the constitutional validity of the impugned legislation. The plaintiff raises a serious and justiciable issue in its attack on the constitutional validity of the Immigration Act and the amending legislation. The issue is one of sufficient importance that, in the interest of the plaintiff, of those immigrants and refugees directly affected by the legislation and of the public in general, the plaintiff should be allowed to raise it. In Thorson, Laskin, C.J., stated at p. 151 S.C.R.:
"The question of the constitutionality of legislation has in this country always been a justiciable question."
[22]
Secondly, the plaintiff has demonstrated that it has a genuine interest in the validity of the legislation. In McNeil, Thorson, Borowski and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  the general public. Nevertheless, they were entitled to challenge legislation on the basis that the government had failed to act in accordance with the constitution and that it had thereby denied or infringed the right to be governed according to constitutional laws. In the Borowski decision, the court was unequivocal that standing is not dependant on whether there is someone with a more direct interest than the plaintiff. The court stated at p. 596 S.C.R.:
"This decision [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ] went beyond the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> judgment in that it recognized the possibility of a person having status to attack the validity of legislation in the circumstances defined in that case
even though there existed classes of persons who were specially affected and who might be exceptionally prejudiced by it
." (Emphasis added)
[23]
In this case, one of the plaintiff's specific mandates is the coordinating of church policies and actions related to the protection and resettlement of refugees both within and outside Canada. The plaintiff is involved in direct assistance to refugees and refugee claimants. In my opinion, this involvement in the refugee process on the part of the plaintiff, as well as the criminal sanctions which members of the plaintiff may face under certain circumstances outlined in the impugned legislation are sufficient, to lead to a finding that the plaintiff does indeed have a genuine interest in the constitutional validity of the legislation.
[24]
Finally, I am satisfied that there exists no reasonable, effective or practical manner for the class of persons more directly affected by the legislation, that is refugees, to bring before the court the constitutional issues raised in the plaintiff's statement of claim. There is little question that this new legislation has accelerated the procedure for those persons making application for refugee status in this country. Such applicants are subject to a 72 hour removal order. In that short period of time an applicant must consult with counsel; a procedure which in itself may take a fair amount of time due to language barriers and the difficulty of a solicitor establishing a proper solicitor-client relationship with an individual who, in some instances, may be from a country where human rights have been disregarded and who is understandably slow to trust anyone in authority.
[25]
Even accepting the defendants' argument that a refugee who has had a removal order made against him may seek a stay or injunction from the Federal Court in order to challenge the removal order, such an injunction cannot be considered by the court before a minimum of 10 days has elapsed from the time of filing the applicant's materials. Consequently, the harm to the refugee will have already occurred and any remedy granted by the court may be illusory given that the refugee will be under the jurisdiction of another state.
[26]
As I view this case, it closely parallels the situation which existed  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . Certainly there were persons more directly affected by the abortion legislation in question than Mr. Borowski himself. In his decision, Martland, J., uses the example of the husband of a pregnant wife who wished to prevent an abortion. At p. 597 S.C.R., his Lordship stated:
"There is no reason why a pregnant woman desirous of obtaining an abortion should challenge the legislation which is for her benefit. The husband of a pregnant wife who desires to prevent an abortion which she desires may be said to be directly affected by the legislation in issue in the sense that by reason of that legislation she might obtain a certificate permitting the abortion if her continued pregnancy would be likely to endanger her life or health and thus prevent the abortion from constituting a crime. However, the possibility of the husband bringing proceedings to attack the legislation is illusory. The progress of the pregnancy would not await the inevitable lengthy lapse of time involved in court proceedings leading to a final judgment. The abortion would have occurred, or a child would have been born long before the case had been finally terminated, perhaps in this court.
. . . . .
"In the light of the Thorson and McNeil cases, it is my opinion that the respondent should be recognized as having legal standing to continue with his action. In the Thorson case, the plaintiff, as an interested citizen, challenged the constitutional validity of the Official Languages Act. The legislation did not directly affect him, save in his position as a taxpayer. He had sought, without avail, to have the constitutional issue raised by other means. He was recognized to have status. The position is the same in the present case. The respondent is a concerned citizen and a taxpayer. He has sought unsuccessfully to have the issue determined by other means.
"In the McNeil case, the plaintiff was concerned about censorship of films in Nova Scotia. He had sought by other means to have the validity of the Theatres and Amusements Act tested, but without success. In that case there were other classes of persons directly affected by the legislation who might have challenged it. Nonetheless, he was recognized as having legal standing because it also affected the rights of the public. The position of the respondent in this case is at least as strong. There are in this case no persons directly affected who could effectively challenge the legislation.
"I interpret these cases as deciding that to establish status as a plaintiff in a suit seeking a declaration that legislation is invalid, if there is a serious issue as to its invalidity, a person need only to show that he is affected by it directly or that he has a genuine interest as a citizen in the validity of the legislation and that there is no other reasonable and effective manner in which the issue may be brought before the court. In my opinion, the respondent has met this test and should be permitted to proceed with his action."
[27]
In my view, the plaintiff in this case has also met the test and status is hereby accorded to it so that it may proceed with its action.
[28]
I turn now to the issue of whether the statement of claim discloses a reasonable cause of action or whether it should be struck out pursuant to rule 419 of the Federal Court Rules.
[29]
In an action for striking out pleadings, the applicant bears the heavy onus of satisfying the court that it is beyond any doubt that the plaintiff's action could not possibly succeed even with proper amendments to the statement of claim. This principle, which reflects the court's traditional reluctance to strike claims thereby denying plaintiffs the right to be heard, has been stated as follows by the Supreme Court of Canada in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(3d) 1, at 740 S.C.R.:
"As I have said, all the facts pleaded in the statement of claim must be deemed to have been proven. On a motion such as this a court should, of course, dismiss the action or strike out any claim made by the plaintiff only in plain and obvious cases and where the court is satisfied that 'the case is beyond doubt'.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (App. Div.)"
[30]
In the case at bar, I am not satisfied that the defendants have succeeded in meeting the onus upon them of proving that the plaintiff's case will undoubtedly fail and the claim should accordingly be struck. The defendants' argument, that the allegations made by the plaintiff fall outside the protections and guarantees of the Charter as that statute has been interpreted to date, is in my view not a persuasive one. As I read the plaintiff's statement of claim, it raises serious, justiciable issues as to the constitutional validity of some of the provisions of the Immigration Act and the amending legislation, concerning refugee's right to counsel, arbitrary detention of certain classes of immigrants entering the country, a refugee's right to life, liberty and security of the person, and criminal sanctions imposed in some instances on those who assist refugees and immigrants, to name but a few.
[31]
Counsel for the defendants argued before me why the impugned legislation did not contravene the Charter. With due respect, that is not a matter to be decided on a motion of this nature but rather is to be left for determination by the trial judge. The fact that the defendants spent considerable time trying to persuade me that the impugned legislation does not contravene any constitutional guarantees, puts into doubt their argument that they do not know how to answer the allegations made by the plaintiff in its statement of claim. I would suggest that counsel for the defendants draft their statement of defence in the same manner that they argued before me; for each of the plaintiff's allegations the defendants must state why the legislative provisions under attack do not contravene the Charter or Bill of Rights or if they do contravene the Charter how they are saved by s. 1 of the Charter. I do not see the matter as being any more complicated than that.
[32]
Neither am I convinced that I should strike out the plaintiff's statement of claim on the grounds that some of its provisions plead bare conclusions of law, unsupported by particulars. This situation is not unusual in constitutional cases of this nature where a party alleges that each impugned provision of a statute is invalid on its face because its effects, in some cases, are unconstitutional. Clearly,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , there did not exist any fact situation on which the Supreme Court based its decision, yet that was not seen as a bar to rendering of a judgment. I am not prepared to dismiss the plaintiff's action, which in my view, raises valid questions of law, solely on the ground that each of the plaintiff's allegations is not supported by a factual basis. I agree with the plaintiff that if the defendants are truly at a loss to answer the pleadings, it is open to them to request particulars pursuant to rule 415 of the Federal Court Rules.
[33]
The defendants argued before me that the plaintiff's statement of claim should be struck as no decision can be made by the court as to the constitutional validity of the impugned legislation because some of the provisions have yet to be interpreted and applied by immigration officials. This argument must also fail. It is the constitutional validity of the legislation itself, as the court interprets that legislation, which is in issue, not the interpretation given to the statute by immigration officials. If the legislation, on its face, offends the Charter or Bill of Rights, it will be struck by the court regardless of how it is being interpreted and applied by those responsible for administering it.
[34]
For the above reasons, the defendants' motion to strike the plaintiff's statement of claim pursuant to rule 419 of the Federal Court Rules is dismissed. Furthermore, I am satisfied that the plaintiff has the standing necessary to proceed with its action and the defendants' motion in that regard is dismissed as well. The defendants will be granted 10 days from the date of the order to file their statement of defence.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/nmg
[End of document]