[1]
Simpson, J.
: Canada Games Company Limited ("Canada Games") is the owner of the YO-YO family of registered trademarks which includes the marks YO-YO, Olympic YO-YO, Mr. YO-YO, Miss YO-YO and World Champion YO-YO. Canada Games and its predecessors have used the trademark YO-YO in Canada since 1931 in association with the manufacture and sale of a toy which is described as a string operated return top toy (the "Toy").
[2]
Canada Games opposed an application for registration of the trademark YOS for wares which are identical to Canada Games' Toy and which are distributed through identical trade channels. The application for registration (No. 617,832) was made by Llumar Star Kites Inc. ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). Llumar manufactures kites and a wide variety of other toys and games.
[3]
In a decision of the Trademarks Opposition Board dated April 29, 1994 (the "Decision") [see footnote 1], David Martin ("Martin") acted on behalf of the Registrar of Trade-Marks, (the "Registrar"), pursuant to s. 63 of the
Trade-marks Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. T-13 (the "
Act
"). Martin granted Llumar's application for registration in spite of Canada Games' opposition. Canada Games now appeals the decision pursuant to rule 704 of the
Federal Court Rules
and ss. 56 and 59 of the
Act
.
The Issue
[4]
Both parties agreed that Martin was correct when he identified "confusion" as the principal issue. They also agreed that Martin correctly held that he had no jurisdiction to make a finding that any of Canada Games' trademarks were invalid. Finally, neither party says that Martin made an express finding about the validity of the Canada Games trademarks in his decision.
[5]
However, Canada Games' appeal is based on the premise that Martin made a finding of fact which was tantamount to a conclusion that the YO-YO trademark is invalid when he accepted Llumar's evidence that YO-YO is the name of the Toy (the "Impugned Finding") [see footnote 2]. The issue, therefore, is whether Martin had jurisdiction to conclude that YO-YO is the name of the Toy.
The Decision
[6]
Martin concluded that the trademark YO-YO possesses no inherent distinctiveness because it is the name of the Toy. This conclusion was based on: i) dictionary definitions of yo-yo; ii) magazine and newspaper references to a yo-yo as a type of toy; and iii) the marketing of items such as yo-yo making kits. Martin also relied on Canada Games' own product labelling and the fact that, in spite of Canada Games' policing efforts, other traders use the word YO-YO to describe a particular type of toy.
[7]
On the issue of acquired distinctiveness, Martin found that Canada Games' YO-YO sales levels in Canada in the period since 1988 suggested "at least some distinctiveness" for YO-YO when used with the Toy. However, since he concluded that yo-yo is the name of the wares, he found this acquired distinctiveness to be "minimal".
[8]
In summary, Martin held that, although there is some visual and phonetic resemblance between YO-YO and YOS, there is no resemblance in the ideas suggested by the two marks and he concluded that, in view of the inherent weakness of the Canada Games mark and given that there are at least some differences between the two marks, they are not confusing.
[9]
Canada Games submits, and I accept, that the impugned finding is central to the decision. It was because Martin concluded that YO-YO was the name of the Toy that he found no inherent distinctiveness and minimal acquired distinctiveness for the mark.
Discussion
[10]
The decision correctly focussed on the issue of confusion. The word confusing is defined in s. 6(2) of the
Act
. Furthermore, s. 6(5) makes it clear that distinctiveness is one of the matters which is relevant to a resolution of the confusion issue. Section 6(5)(a) provides that, "[i]n determining whether trade-marks ... are confusing the ... Registrar shall have regard to all the surrounding circumstances including a) the inherent distinctiveness of the trade-marks or trade-names and the extent to which they have become known ...". Accordingly, Martin was obliged by statute to consider both inherent and acquired distinctiveness in relation to Canada Games' marks.
[11]
While Canada Games concedes that Martin had jurisdiction to consider inherent distinctiveness, it submits that he was not entitled to make the impugned finding because it had the effect of negating the trademark registration for YO-YO. That registration was originally granted pursuant to s. 12(1)(c) of the
Act
on the basis that YO-YO was not the name of the wares used or proposed to be used. Canada Games submits that Martin should have assumed that the conditions set forth in s. 12(1) were still satisfied and should only have dealt with matters raised in s. 6(5) which did not negate the facts which pertained at registration. Canada Games argues that, until the trademark YO-YO is set aside in a proper proceeding, it is entitled to the benefit of its registration. By this, Canada Games means that a validly registered trademark is to be presumed to satisfy the conditions set forth in s. 12(1) of the
Act
until this court decides otherwise in expungement proceedings under s. 57 of the
Act
. This submission suggests, in effect, that Martin was estopped from concluding that YO-YO is the name of the wares because that conclusion negates the Registrar's conclusion at the time of registration.
[12]
In my view, this submission cannot succeed. It was in the course of his consideration of inherent distinctiveness that Martin made the impugned finding. He was, in my view, obliged to consider all of the circumstances - including the evidence before him on the issue of inherent distinctiveness - and draw appropriate conclusions. There was uncontradicted evidence which supported Martin's conclusion that the mark YO-YO had become the name of the Toy. A consideration of this evidence and the resulting conclusions were central to the analysis Martin was required to perform under the
Act
. In these circumstances, I can find no basis for concluding that he lacked jurisdiction to make the impugned finding.
[13]
As well, I am not persuaded that the impugned finding has anything, even implicitly, to do with validity. The YO-YO trademark will remain valid until it is expunged by an order of this court. If expungement proceedings are brought, the mark's inherent and acquired distinctiveness at the date that the proceeding is commenced will be at issue and it is noteworthy that, even in cases where trademarks have come into popular use as generic words, it is still possible for them to retain their distinctiveness [see footnote 3].
Conclusion
[14]
For all these reasons, the appeal is dismissed. Martin had jurisdiction to conclude that YO-YO had become the name of the Toy. However, this conclusion was not a finding which either expressly or implicitly dealt with the validity of Canada Games trademarks.
Appeal dismissed.
Editor: Jana A. Andersen/gs
Footnotes
1.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.M. Opp. Bd.).
2. Ibid, at p. 253.
3.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  document]