 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
Federal Court
Campbell, J.
March 7, 2005.
Counsel:
Michael Crane, for the applicant;
Marcel Larouche, for the respondent.
Solicitors of Record:
Michael Crane, Toronto, Ontario, for the applicant;
John H. Sims, Q.C., Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, for the respondent.
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary.
[1]
Campbell, J.
: In the present case, the Applicant is a Tamil citizen of Sri Lanka who fears persecution from the Sri Lanka security forces. The Applicant's father was determined to be a Convention refugee in Canada in 1999, and he then sponsored the applicant's mother, brother and sister in 2001. The applicant remained in Sri Lanka, but claimed numerous instances of detention and physical abuse by the Sri Lankan Army (SLA) and the police, between December 1994 and July 2001.
[2]
The main argument presented by the Applicant is that the Refugee Protection Division ("RPD") rendered it's decision in denial of natural justice. This argument results from a statement made by the RPD during the hearing which is fundamentally contradicted in the decision rendered.
[3]
During the hearing the RPD said as follows:
"PRESIDING MEMBER: We are back on the record; the same persons are present with the exception of the RPO who has left us. We are about to hear the submissions from counsel. Counsel, I don't think we need to make lengthy submissions on credibility. I found the claimant to be credible and the one omission, the fish business, is both in the father's PIF and in the claimant's so I don't think you need to touch on credibility. (Tribunal Record, p. 296)"
However, in it's reasons for decision, the RPD stated as follows:
"In November 2002, in what he described as his most horrific incident, the claimant acknowledged that he was swept up in a riot where he was not targeted but was in the wrong place at the wrong time and he went to the police because of his experiences and because he lost his scooter in the melee.
I find that if the claimant had a well founded fear of the police, he would not be likely to go to the same police for protection on two occasions
." [Emphasis added]
(RPD Decision, p. 5)
[4]
In my opinion, there is no ambiguity in the RPD's reasons; the Applicant's claim of subjective fear of the police was rejected on a negative credibility finding. In my opinion, this conclusion is a denial of natural justice given the fact that the RPD stated that credibility was not in issue in the claim made. Therefore, I find the decision was rendered in reviewable error.
ORDER
[5]
Accordingly, the RPD's decision is set aside and the matter is referred back to a differently constituted panel for redetermination.
[End of document]