[1] Gibson, J.
: This is an application for judicial review of a decision of the Convention Refugee Determination Division (the "CRDD") of the Immigration and Refugee Board wherein the CRDD determined the applicant not to be a Convention refugee within the meaning of the
Immigration Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2. The decision of the CRDD is dated the 23rd day of February, 1993.
[2]
The relief requested by the applicant is an order setting aside the decision of the CRDD and an order for mandamus to require the respondent to rehear the applicant's claim to Convention refugee status before a differently constituted panel [footnote 1].
[3]
At the time of hearing of the applicant's claim by the CRDD, on the 8th day of December, 1992, the applicant was seventy years of age. Both the applicant and her son gave oral testimony. They were determined to be credible. The applicant's son has been granted Convention refugee status in Canada. Her daughters and five grandchildren are now citizens of Canada.
[4]
The applicant bases her claim to Convention refugee status on an alleged well-founded fear of persecution if she were required to return to the country of her citizenship, El Salvador, by reason of her membership in a particular social group and her political opinion.
[5]
The applicant's son was a labour union leader in El Salvador. He was pursued by death squads by reason of his union activities. He fled El Salvador in 1983. In April, 1984, three persons entered the applicant's home while she was at work. Only the applicant's husband was in the home. At the time, he was seventy-eight years of age. The three were found by the CRDD to be members of the death squads and to be looking for the applicant's son. They ransacked the house. They raped the applicant's husband and pushed a stick up his rectum. They attempted to suffocate him but he was able in the struggle to pick up a machete and the three fled. The applicant's husband took a taxi to the hospital where he remained for two days and underwent two operations. He never fully recovered. The applicant and her husband fled El Salvador in June, 1984. Her husband died in the United States two years after the attack.
[6]
The CRDD examined the question of changed country circumstances in El Salvador in the following four paragraphs extracted from its rather brief decision:
"The important question for consideration is whether with the changes taking place in El Salvador following the Peace Accord signed on January 13, 1992, there is an objective basis for her fear if she is returned to El Salvador. She is seventy years old and most of her family are residing abroad.
"The conflict between the army and the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front (FMLN) has ceased. There have been delays in the implementation of various aspects of the Peace Accord, but the two parties have been able under the auspices of the United Nations to solve their difficulties.
"It did appear recently that the delay by government in removing army personnel who had been found responsible for human rights violations might have led to the resumption of hostilities. This is no longer so. President Alfredo Cristiani has written to the Secretary General of the United Nations disclosing plans for the 'purification' of the army. The FMLN has resumed demobilization of their forces and has recommended the handing over of their weapons to the United Nations.
"It is evidence from the documentary evidence that the climate of fear from which the claimant had escaped in 1984, no longer exits. Eight years have since elapsed. We have carefully considered this objective basis of the claim and there is nothing to remotely suggest any good grounds for fearing persecution. Undoubtedly the claimant may encounter hardship because of her age should she return to El Salvador. But such an experience cannot provide any reasonable basis for fearing persecution."
[7]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), following
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), I adopted as the appropriate test of changing country conditions or circumstances the one propounded by James Hathaway in
The Law of Refugee Status
, Butterworths, Toronto, 1991, at pp. 200-203. Nadon, J., in
Mahmoud
summarizes the test as one "... pursuant to which fundamental and significant changes of proven durability must be shown ...". In another context, he described the changes required as "... significant, effective and durable." In paragraphs quoted above from the CRDD's decision, it speaks of "...
delays
in the implementation of various aspects of the Peace Accord, ...", the President writing to the Secretary General of the United Nations "...
disclosing plans
for the purification of the army" and of the FMLN
resuming
demobilization and
recommencing
the handing over of weapons. (The underlining has been added for emphasis). I conclude that the CRDD's analysis falls far short of demonstrating fundamental and significant change of proven durability or significant, effective and durable change. I therefore conclude that the finding against the applicant on the basis of changed country circumstances cannot stand.
[8]
In light of the foregoing conclusion, I need not go further. However, the CRDD goes on to examine the application of the "cessation" provisions of s. 2(2) and (3) of the
Immigration Act
to the circumstances of the applicant. Under those sections, a person who might otherwise be a Convention refugee ceases to be a Convention refugee if the reasons for that person's fear of persecution in the relevant country ceased to exist unless there are compelling reasons arising out of any previous persecution for that person to refuse to avail of the protection of the relevant country. The CRDD concluded that it did not find any "compelling reasons" in the circumstances of the applicant.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), McKeown, J., commented as follows:
"As indicated by the board in its reasons, s. 2(3) is based on a general humanitarian principle which permits a person who has suffered serious past persecution to retain or obtain Convention refugee status despite fundamental changes in his country of origin. The UNHCR handbook states:
'It is frequently recognized that a person who -
or whose family
- has suffered under atrocious forms of persecution should not be expected to repatriate. Even though there may have been a change of regime in his country, this may not always produce a
complete change
in the attitude of the population, nor, in view of his past experiences,
in the mind of the refugee
.'
"In interpreting the meaning of 'compelling reasons' in the case <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> [
The Minister of Employment and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.)], the Federal Court of Appeal referred to persons had 'suffered such appalling persecution that their experience alone is a compelling reason not to return them'." (underlining added for emphasis).
[9]
While the applicant herein may not have suffered, directly, appalling persecution, I conclude that there are few who would differ with the view that her husband suffered appalling or atrocious persecution. It is important to note that the quotation from the UNHCR handbook indicates that this of itself can be sufficient to constitute compelling reason not to return an applicant in the situation of the applicant here.
[10]
For the reasons cited above regarding the issue of changed country circumstances, this application is allowed.
[11]
There remains the issue of certification of a question. Counsel before me agreed on the terminology of two questions to be certified. Those questions are in the following terms:
"1. In deciding whether of not an applicant has satisfied the requirements of the definition of Convention refugee in s. 2 of the
Immigration Act
, should the Immigration and Refugee Board consider the requirements of subs. 2(2) and subs. 2(3) in deciding whether or not the criteria of subs. 2(1) are met or instead should the board decide whether or not the applicant first falls within the definition of subs. 2(1) before considering subs. 2(2) and subs. 2(3)?
"2. Does subs. 2(3) apply in circumstances where the applicant himself has not been the subject of persecutory acts?"
[12]
In light of the fact that I have decided this matter on the basis of the issue of changed country circumstances rather than on the basis of the CRDD's analysis of the application of s. 2(2) and (3) of the
Immigration Act
, neither of the foregoing questions is certified. Counsel advised that the first of the two questions quoted above arises also in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.) which, I understand, is under appeal to the Federal Court of Appeal.
Application allowed.
Editor: Reginald W. Curtis/saf
Footnotes
1.	I assume that the reference to the respondent should in fact be a reference to the Immigration and Refugee Board.
[End of document]