[1]
Dubé, J.
: The appellant ("Murjani") appeals pursuant to s. 56 of the Trade Marks Act, R.S.C. 1970, c. T-10, ("the Act") from a decision of the Registrar of Trade Marks made pursuant to s. 37(8) of the Act rejecting the appellant's opposition to the respondent's ("Universal") trademark application number 456,248 for the trademark "JON VANDERVELDT & Design".
[2]
The appeal is based on two grounds. Firstly, that the Registrar erred in holding that Universal's trademark is not confusing with any of Murjani's three trademarks, "GLORIA VANDERBILT", "GLORIA VANDERBILT Design" and "GV Design" and secondly that the Registrar erred in holding that Universal is a person entitled to registration of the trademark "JON VANDERVELDT & Design".
[3]
Murjani, a British Virgin Islands corporation, with the consent and authorization of Ms. Gloria Vanderbilt of New York, U.S.A., has used in Canada since 1979 the trademark "GLORIA VANDERBILT", the trademark "GLORIA VANDERBILT Design":
[Diagram omitted. See printed version.]
and the trademark "GV Design":
[Diagram omitted. See printed version.]
in association with certain articles of clothing.
[4]
On July 7, 1980, Universal filed in the Canadian Trade Marks Office its application number 456,248 to register the proposed trademark:
[Diagram omitted. See printed version.]
for use in association with clothing.
[5]
During the examination of its application Universal admitted that its trademark was an invention and did not, to the knowledge of Universal, constitute the signature of any person who was alive or had been living within the last thirty years. Murjani opposed the application on March 25, 1981, on the grounds mentioned earlier and filed four affidavits. On April 11, 1983, Universal's trademark agents notified the Registrar that it would not be presenting any evidence. On December 20, 1983, Murjani filed its written arguments in support of its opposition. Universal filed no written arguments. On April 30, 1985, the Registrar rejected Murjani's opposition pursuant to s. 37(8) of the Act.
[6]
The agents of Universal notified the Federal Court that they would not be attending the hearing of this appeal of the decision of the Registrar and confirmed that their client "has never had any intention of contesting this appeal". Under similar circumstances Cattanach, J., said in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.), that such a situation places the judge in an "invidious" position which was "almost tantamount to making him counsel for the respondent".
[7]
It is settled law that the Registrar's decision in the matter of confusing trademarks should be given great weight and ought not to be set aside lightly, but such reliance on the Registrar's decision on whether two trademarks are or are not confusingly similar must not go to the extent of relieving the judge hearing any appeal from the Registrar's decision of his own responsibility for determining the issue with due regard to all the relevant circumstances (see  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (S.C.C.), pages 8 and 9).
[8]
In his decision the Registrar correctly stated that the essential question to be determined is whether the applicant's trademark is confusing with one or more of the opponent's trademark (at the outset of the instant appeal, counsel for Murjani argued that the alleged confusion was with the "GLORIA VANDERBILT Design" and the "GV Design" and not the "GLORIA VANDERBILT" trademark in block letters).
[9]
The Registrar also correctly stated that the material date for considering this question is the date of filing of Universal's application (July 16, 1980) in the case of the ground of opposition that Universal is not the person entitled to registration under s. 16(3) of the Act and the date of filing of the statement of opposition (March 25, 1981) with respect to the ground of opposition that the applicant's trademark is not distinctive ((1982), 61 C.P.R.(2d) 42).
[10]
He also correctly pointed out that with respect to the first ground of opposition there is an initial burden upon Murjani to establish use of its trademark prior to the date of filing of Universal's application and that Murjani had not abandoned its trademark at that time. On that score, he properly ruled that the burden had clearly been discharged by the evidence filed by Murjani.
[11]
The Registrar also found that "the nature of the respective wares and trades are very similar". He held that there was a "degree of resemblance between the trademarks" and correctly described the similarities between them as follows:
"... The first two syllables of the surnames 'Vanderbilt' and 'Vanderveldt' are identical and the third syllables of each are similar in pronunciation. Especially since the pronunciation of the letter 'g' in French is similar to the pronunciation of the letter 'j' in English and vice versa, there is a significant resemblance between the letters 'jv' and 'gv'."
[12]
However, he went on to say that surnames and letters are very weak in terms of distinctiveness and concluded on those grounds, as follows, that Universal's trademark is not confusing:
"... It is well established, however, that surnames and letters are very weak in terms of distinctiveness. The average person is accustomed to making relatively fine distinctions between different surnames and between different letters. Because of this, the differences between the applicant's trademark and the opponent's trademarks and in particular the various design features and the use of the name 'Jon' instead of the name 'Gloria' assume a relatively greater importance. When the applicant's trademark and the opponent's trademarks are considered in their totalities and as a matter of first impression, I consider the degree of resemblance between them to be small. Because of this, despite the use and advertising by the opponent of its trademarks in Canada and the fact that the nature of the respective wares and trades are very similar, I am satisfied that the applicant's trademark is not confusing with any of the opponent's trademarks within the meaning of s. 6 of the Trade Marks Act. Accordingly, I reject the opponent's grounds of opposition that the applicant is not the person entitled to registration and that the applicant's trademark is not distinctive."
[13]
The circumstances to be considered in determining whether trademarks are confusing are set out in s. 6(5) of the Act which, for convenience, I am reproducing in full:
"6.(5) In determining whether the trademarks or trade names are confusing, the court or the Registrar, as the case may be, shall have regard to all the surrounding circumstances including
(a) the inherent distinctiveness of the trademarks or trade names and the extent to which they have become known;
(b) the length of time the trademarks or trade names have been in use;
(c) the nature of the wares, services or business;
(d) the nature of the trade; and
(e) the degree of resemblance between the trademarks or trade names in appearance or sound or in the ideas suggested by them."
[14]
Before dealing separately with each paragraph of s. 6(5) it is important to restate the well known principles established by Luxmoore, L.J., In the Matter of an Application by Rysta Ltd. to register a Trade Mark ((1943), 60 R.P.C. 87. This principle was approved by both the House of Lords in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ):
"It is the person who only knows the one word, and has perhaps an imperfect recollection of it, who is likely to be deceived or confused. Little assistance, therefore, is to be obtained from a meticulous comparison of the two words letter by letter and syllable by syllable pronounced with the clarity to be expected from a teacher of elocution. The court must be careful to make allowance for imperfect recollection and the effect of careless pronunciation and speech on the part not only of the person seeking to buy under the trade description, but also of the shop assistant ministering to that person's wants."
a)
The inherent distinctiveness of the trademarks and the extent to which they have become known
[15]
At the outset, I must find that the four affidavits filed by Murjani are to be accepted as evidence because the affiants were not cross-examined (See  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at 208; Faberge Incorporated and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 78). In my view, Murjani's uncontroverted evidence establishes that "GLORIA VANDERBILT Design" and "GV Design", as a result of massive advertising campaigns in both the United States and in Canada, had already become widely known in this country prior to the date of Universal's application. As a result, sales in both the United States and Canada were booming.
[16]
According to Hannah North, General Merchandise Manager of the T. Eaton Co. Ltd., "by July 1980 the Gloria Vanderbilt mark had received widespread customer recognition in Canada" and the use of the proposed Vanderveldt trademark "in association with articles of clothing would likely cause confusion in the Canadian public as to the source of such clothing".
[17]
According to the affidavit of Kaisar Ahmad, the Senior Vice-President of Murjani, Murjani "was looking for a status trademark" and selected the Vanderbilt name which was at that time already widely known in the United States and elsewhere in the world. Gloria Vanderbilt, a designer of some renown, was the great great grand-daughter of Commodore Cornelius Vanderbilt, founder of a vast railroad fortune in the United States. The sale of Gloria Vanderbilt clothing was "an immediate success on the U.S. market". Total sales started at $6,700,000.00 U.S. in 1978 and rose to $168,750,000.00 U.S. in 1981. Sales in Canada for that year reached $1,000,000.00 U.S. Advertising expenditures in Canada for that year were of $400,000.00 U.S.
[18]
The proposition of the Registrar that surnames and letters are weak in terms of distinctiveness and therefore deserve little protection is well established. However, the distinctiveness of such trademarks may be enhanced through publicity and use.
[19]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.), I also found that "the degree of distinctiveness attributed to a weak mark may be enhanced through intensive use".
[20]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  However a 'weak' mark by long and extensive use might become distinctive. For the reasons expressed above I am of the opinion that the appellant has failed to establish that its mark had become distinctive."
[21]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Ont. C.A.), Blair, J.A., of the Ontario Court of Appeal referred to Cattanach, J., in the above decision and remarked that in that case the trademark  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  in block letters "virtually without embellishment" was weak, but found (at page 183) that "the result might have been different had the mark consisted not only of letters of the alphabet but also design features giving it greater distinctiveness". In the instance case, of course, the Vanderbilt name and initials are presented in the signature form and according to the uncontested evidence aforementioned both the Vanderbilt signature and the initials G.V. have achieved high distinctiveness on the market following crash publicity campaigns in both countries. There is also evidence of a spillover of the American advertising campaign into this country.
[22]
The word Vanderbilt conveys to me, and I believe that would be the reaction of the general public, the impression of a distinguished foreign name, probably of Dutch extraction, which carries a rich aura of status and exclusivity.
b)
The length of time the trademarks or trade names have been in use
[23]
The "GLORIA VANDERBILT Design" and the "GV Design" marks have been used in Canada since mid 1979 and at least as early as March 19, 1980, respectively. There is no evidence that the "JON VANDERVELDT & Design" mark has ever been used. In the absence of evidence of use of the Vanderveldt mark, there is no burden upon Murjani to file evidence of actual confusion between the marks.
c)
The nature of the wares
[24]
The wares of both parties are articles of clothing.
d)
The nature of the trade
[25]
According to the evidence, the wares of Murjani are sold to the Canadian public through nationwide retail department stores. There is no evidence as to how and where Universal would sell its wares.
e)
The degree of resemblance between the marks, appearance, sound or ideas suggested
[26]
The Registrar found a "degree of resemblance" between the marks. I would go further than that. At first sight, the word Vanderveldt appeared to me to be an obvious imitation of the surname Vanderbilt. Both words look so much alike and sound so similar that the former, not being the surname of any person, was clearly created to come very close to the latter without being identical.
[27]
Moreover, both designs appear in the form of signatures which closely resemble one another, certainly enough in my view to create confusion at first blush. And the initials, "JV" and "GV", are as close as you can come in pairing similar combinations of two letters from the alphabet. The letters "J" and "G" could easily lead to confusion, as the Registrar noted, in a bilingual setting. Some bilingual people pause before pronouncing either a "J" or a "G" in either language so as to avoid possible mispronunciation. I know I do.
[28]
Returning to the well known quote of Luxmoore, L.J., it is not for the court to enter into a "meticulous comparison of the two words letter by letter and syllable by syllable pronounced with the clarity to be expected from a teacher of elocution". The court must "make allowance for imperfect recollection and the effect of careless pronunciation" on the part of a prospective customer and "also of the shop assistant ministering to that person's wants".
[29]
The resemblance in sound between the two marks is even more telling, with the first two syllables being identical and the third one dropping off. As stated by Sargeant, L.J., in London Lubricants (1920) Limited's Application (1925), 42 R.P.C. 264, at 279:
"... the tendency of persons using the English language to slur the termination of words also has the effect necessarily that the beginning of words is accentuated in comparison, and in my judgment, the first syllable of a word is, as a rule, far the most important for the purpose of distinction."
Other surrounding circumstances (paragraph 6(5))
[30]
There is a substantial body of law and jurisprudence granting special protection to a person using his or her name to carry out his or her business, as opposed to the protection granted to a trademark bearing a fictitious name.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Ch. Div.), Mr. Justice Romer of the High Court of Justice of England, discussed the law applicable to the matter and said as follows at page 291:
"Arriving at that conclusion of fact, what is the law that is applicable to the matter? I think the law can be very simply stated. It is the law of this land that no man is entitled to carry on his business in such a way as to represent that it is the business of another, or is in any way connected with the business of another; that is the first proposition. The second proposition is, that no man is entitled so to describe or mark his goods as to represent that the goods are the goods of another. To the first proposition there is, I myself think, an exception: a man, in my opinion, is entitled to carry on his business in his own name so long as he does not do anything more than that to cause confusion with the business of another, and so long as he does it honestly. It is an exception to the rule which has of necessity been established."
[31]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (H.L.), at p. 279, Lord Morris of Borth-y-Gest set out six propositions which would apply to this matter. In proposition four he quoted with approval Romer, J., from the above judgment and also Lord Simonds who said as follows in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (at p. 251):
"... It is an unassailable general proposition that the interests alike of honest traders and of the public require that the goods of A should not be confused with the goods of B. But that proposition is subject to the qualification that a man must be allowed to trade in his own name and, if some confusion results, that is a lesser evil than that a man should be deprived of what would appear to be a natural and inherent right. But ... it is a fantastic gloss upon this well-established qualification to say that it justifies a trader in placing upon his goods a mark which, however much he may intend it to signify his name, is yet liable to suggest to reasonable men the name of another."
[32]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  the Supreme Court of Canada referred to a passage in the judgment of Turner, L.J., in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  goods under a particular name, and another person, not having that name, is using it, it may be presumed that he so uses it to represent the goods sold by himself as the goods of the person whose name he uses; but where the defendant sells goods under his own name, and it happens that the plaintiff has the same name, it does not follow that the defendant is selling his goods as the goods of the plaintiff."
[33]
Finally, in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Cal. C.A.), the California District Court of Appeal, said at page 259:
"... In the instant case we have the borrowed surname of an individual who has no interest in the appellant's business.
"The courts will go to some lengths to protect the right of an individual
in his own
surname ...
"... It must be kept in mind, therefore, that if appellant's own name were 'Fellows' it would have a right in that name that the courts would protect to the greatest extent possible. Appellant here, however, had an unlimited choice, and he would be under a duty to choose a name that may not be considered a colorable imitation of another trademark."
[34]
In the case at bar, it must be borne in mind that Gloria Vanderbilt lent her own name, thus her considerable personal status and prestige, to Murjani for its trademark, whereas Universal merely invented a name for its own trademark thereby raising a presumption that, by adopting such a fictitious matching name, Universal intended to create confusion to its own benefit. No evidence was filed to rebut that presumption. On the other hand, the uncontradicted evidence is to the effect that Murjani acted honestly in carrying out its business under its purposeful trademark.
[35]
Had Universal appeared at this hearing, it might have contended that where an opponent to the registration of a trademark relies on prior use, the onus lies upon him to establish a reputation in the trade in connection with a mark of some character. That very argument was addressed by Cattanach, J., in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.). He said as follows (at page 35):
"In my view that stark statement is much too simplified. The onus is upon an applicant for the registration of a trademark to establish his right thereto and that onus is constant upon him (see  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  onus never shifts but a burden of proof does. The applicant may rebut the proof proffered by the opponent."
[36]
In this instance, the applicant Universal has not even attempted to show that confusion is unlikely and has made no effort to rebut the proof proffered by the opponent Murjani.
[37]
For all those reasons, the appeal is allowed with costs.
Appeal allowed.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/sms
[End of document]