[1]
MacKay, J.
: These are Reasons for Orders made in relation to two applications for judicial review, heard at the same time in Toronto, concerning decisions of an immigration officer dated August 8, 1995 and August 9, 1995 denying the separate applications for permanent residence of the applicants Lora Grube and Stjopa Khachatryan, and their respective dependants. In those decisions the officer determined that the respective applicants do not have sufficient units of assessment to be admitted to Canada as self-employed persons and permanent residents.
[2]
The facts of the two cases are similar and they raise essentially the same issues for determination by this court. Before these matters came on for hearing, counsel for the respondent indicated there would be consent to allowing the applications and for reference back for redetermination of the applications for admission as self-employed persons, a position maintained at the hearing, but counsel for the parties were unable to agree on whether, and if so what, directions should be given in relation to reconsideration of the applications. Thus, at the hearing, the parties made submissions in relation to possible directions in relation to reconsideration. Following the hearing and after consultation in writing with counsel about the terms of draft orders, I issued orders granting the applications for judicial review with general directions. These are the reasons for those orders, now filed in accord with s. 51 of the
Federal Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7.
[3]
It is useful to summarize the factual background in each of these applications, first, that of Ms. Grube, and her family (IMM-2484-95), and then that of Mr. Khachatryan and his family (IMM-2532-95).
[4]
The applicant Lora Grube, a 46 year old citizen of the Republic of Latvia, submitted an application as a principal applicant for permanent residence in December 1994 indicating that her intended occupation in Canada is a self-employed ballet coach/choreographer. Her husband, Oleg Grube, a painting restorer, and her son Eduard-Kristian Grube, applied as dependants of Ms. Grube. Ms. Grube included with her application degrees and awards which she had received during her career in dance as well as newspaper articles about her.
[5]
Ms. Grube graduated as a ballet dancer from the Riga Choreography School in 1967, where she had been coached by famous ballet dancers. From 1967 to 1969 she performed as a soloist ballet dancer at the Riga Musical Theatre, and from 1969 to 1974 she was the leading soloist at the Odessa Academic Opera and Ballet Theatre. Thereafter, between 1974 and 1991, while employed with the Latvian State Academic Opera and Ballet Theatre, she gained recognition and performed a number of leading parts and was given the distinction of prima ballerina. She also participated in a number of tours with the Bolshoi Theatre. In 1976 Ms. Grube was awarded the Laureate's Title and the gold medal at the Soviet All-Union Competition of Choreographers and Ballet Dancers in Moscow. Thereafter, in 1977, she received the prize for the best ensemble in a duet at the Third International Competition of Ballet Dancers in Moscow. In addition, in 1978, the title of Honoured Artist of the Latvian SSR was conferred upon her.
[6]
Ms. Grube gave up her dancing career in 1991 and began to work as a dance coach with the Latvian National Opera and later with the Riga Choreography School. She was also, from 1993, employed as a choreographer and ballet coach with the Riga Chamber Opera on a contractual basis. From 1992 Ms. Grube operated a ballet class in a studio she set up at the Riga Chamber Opera.
[7]
Ms. Grube stated in materials supporting her application that she intends to register a sole proprietorship offering ballet coaching and choreography services. In addition, she stated that she has an offer from a former colleague to coach at the latter's Bayview School of Dance in Willowdale, Ontario. Ms. Grube also stated an intention to rent time in other studios in order to teach students of her own.
[8]
By letter dated April 13, 1995 Ms. Grube was advised by the visa officer at the Canadian High Commission in London that assessment of her application was complete and that she did not qualify for immigration to Canada. The immigration officer informed Ms. Grube that she does not comply with the definition of a self-employed person found in s. 2(1) of the
Immigration Regulations
, SOR/78-172 (the "
Regulations
") because she had not sufficiently demonstrated that she has the intent and ability to provide active participation in the successful management of a business, nor had she established that she is in a position to make a significant cultural contribution to Canada. The visa officer further stated:
"... You have not provided any formal accounts that demonstrate a successful business background and, from the information contained on your application for permanent residence, it appears that you have been employed since 1974 by various state opera and ballet companies. Accordingly, I have determined that your proposal to work as a self-employed ballet coach and choreographer does not meet the above definition of a business immigrant and you would not provide a significant contribution to the economy."
The visa officer also stated that he would be prepared to further consider her application if Ms. Grube could provide documentation showing proof of company accounts, articles of business incorporation, professional self-employed experience as a ballet teacher and a completed business survey together with business references and a net worth statement. Without such documentation, the visa officer stated, Ms. Grube's application would not receive favourable consideration. In addition, the letter stated that the job offer from her colleague did not qualify as self-employment since the relationship proposed was more in the nature of employer-employee. The visa officer also noted that Ms. Grube's assets of $20,000.00 would be insufficient to permit her to establish or purchase a business. On those bases the visa officer determined that Ms. Grube had not acquired sufficient units of assessment to qualify for permanent residence.
[9]
Ms. Grube had not been accorded an interview at the time that determination was made, nor has she attended at an interview in connection with her application since that time.
[10]
By letter dated June 2, 1995 counsel for Ms. Grube advised the Canadian High Commission that he disagreed with the position of the immigration officials that Ms. Grube did not qualify as a self-employed person. In counsel's view, the immigration officer had placed undue emphasis on Ms. Grube's lack of past successful formal business experience. That criterion, in his view, is only one of many to be considered, and is not necessarily decisive of the matter. In addition, counsel stated, Ms. Grube did have experience as a self-employed person. Counsel noted that she could not be expected to have the type of formal business documentation one might expect if she were in Canada because of the nature of her proposed business and because the Latvian economy was in transition. It was also stated that the offer from the Bayview School of Dance provided for part-time work only, and, as Ms. Grube intended to have other clients, the relationship would not be one of employer-employee.
[11]
By letter dated August 8, 1995 the immigration officer advised counsel for Ms. Grube that her application had been refused, as was stated in the letter of April 13, 1995, at which time processing of her application had been concluded.
[12]
The applicant Stjopa Khachatryan, a 42 year old resident of Estonia, made application for permanent residence in Canada as a music teacher/pianist self-employed person in October 1994. His wife, Asthik Alanakyan, two daughters, Liana and Miriam Khachatryan, and son, Harutyun Khachatryan, who are also applicants in this judicial review, applied as dependants of him.
[13]
Mr. Khachatryan studied music at the Leninakan Musical School, following which he was admitted to the Yerevan State Conservatory, which was said to be Armenia's most respected university level institute, from which he graduated in 1978 as both a violinist and a pianist. Following graduation, he worked as a piano teacher and a concert pianist. He played the piano at official government concerts and acted as a piano soloist with the Violin Orchestra of Leninakan. In 1985 he was chosen to co-produce and play the piano for an opera written by noted Armenian composer Armen Tigranyan, following which he obtained a position in East Germany organizing musical competitions for children of Soviet military personnel. Since 1989 he has worked as a piano teacher and a pianist at the Pyarnu Musical School in Estonia, as well as working as a first violinist and providing private piano lessons for students. Mr. Khachatryan is a specialist in Armenian folk music, a specialty which he hopes to pursue in his proposed teaching in Canada.
[14]
In supporting material for his application Mr. Khachatryan stated that he intends to register a sole proprietorship in Toronto where he will offer his services as a music teacher and pianist in his own home and on a freelance basis for other studios, although he eventually intends to secure his own studio. He noted that he is particularly interested in serving the Armenian community in the Toronto area and he intends to offer his services for weddings, social events, concerts and other occasions of significance for members of that community.
[15]
By letter dated April 13, 1995 Mr. Khachatryan was advised by the Canadian High Commission that his application for permanent residence had been refused. The visa officer stated that, in his view, Mr. Khachatryan did not meet the definition of a self-employed person on the basis that he had not demonstrated an intent and ability to provide active participation in the successful management of a business. Moreover, it was said, Mr. Khachatryan had not satisfied the visa officer that he would be able to make a significant contribution to the cultural or artistic life of Canada. As with the letter to Ms. Grube, this letter also indicated that Mr. Khachatryan had not provided any formal accounts that would demonstrate a successful business background and that he had been employed by various state organizations throughout his careers. Moreover, it was stated that further consideration would be given to his application only if he were able to provide satisfactory documentation of proof of company accounts, articles of incorporation, experience as a self-employed professional person, proof of international recognition as a performing artist, as well as other business-related documentation. Without that documentation, it was said, Mr. Khachatryan's application would not receive favourable consideration. The letter also stated that Mr. Khachatryan's transferable money assets of $3,000.00 would be insufficient for him to establish or purchase a business. On that basis it was determined that Mr. Khachatryan would not make a significant economic contribution or a significant contribution to the cultural or artistic life of Canada.
[16]
Thereafter, by letter dated June 2, 1995 counsel for Mr. Khachatryan advised the visa officer that he disagreed with the assessment. In counsel's view, the visa officer had again placed undue emphasis on the lack of formal business experience of Mr. Khachatryan which, he suggests, is only one criterion to be considered. In addition, counsel submitted that, in requesting proof of international status, the visa officer had set the threshold for qualifying as a self-employed person too high, which is not envisioned by the
Regulations
. In addition, counsel pointed out that Mr. Khachatryan has some experience as a self-employed music teacher.
[17]
By letter dated August 9, 1995 counsel for Mr. Khachatryan was advised that the latter's application had already been considered and refused by letter dated April 13, 1995. As in the case of Ms. Grube, Mr. Khachatryan had not attended any interview in connection with his application at that time, or since.
The Applications For Judicial Review
[18]
As indicated at the commencement of these reasons, counsel for the respondent agreed that the applications in each case should be referred back for reconsideration. That position was based on established jurisprudence concerning s. 11.1(b) of the
Regulations
, which provides:
"11.1 For the purpose of determining whether an immigrant and the immigrant's dependants will be able to become successfully established in Canada, a visa officer is not required to conduct an interview unless, based on a review of the visa application and documents submitted in support thereof,
. . . . .
(b) the immigrant is an entrepreneur, an investor, a provincial nominee or a self-employed person."
[19]
Counsel agreed that s. 11.1(b) of the
Regulations
requires the visa officer to conduct an interview with a person applying to immigrate as a self-employed person. My colleague Mr. Justice Teitelbaum in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm.L.R.(2d) 275 (T.D.), stated, in relation to s. 11.1(b):
"I am satisfied that by not having granted the applicant an interview, the visa officer was not in a position to determine whether or not he would have allowed the 30 units of assessment in s. 8(4) of the
Regulations
...
"... I believe the visa officer has no discretion but to grant the interview mentioned in Factor 9."
Thus, s. 11.1 of the
Regulations
, which expressly states that an interview is not required in other circumstances, implicitly requires that an interview be held where an applicant is applying as a self-employed person. Thus, in my opinion, the visa officer erred in determining each of the applicants' applications for permanent residence, based on the principal applicants' plans to be self-employed persons, without granting them an interview.
[20]
Counsel for the applicants submits that Ms. Grube and Mr. Khachatryan did fall within the parameters of the definition of a "self-employed" person under the
Regulations
because they each intend to establish a business in Canada that will create an employment opportunity for herself or himself and each will make a significant contribution to the economy or to the cultural or artistic life of Canada. For the applicants it is submitted that the visa officer was required to determine three issues in assessing Ms. Grube's and Mr. Khachatryan's applications. These issues are drawn from decisions of Associate Chief Justice Jerome in cases relating to rejected applications for admission to Canada as self-employed persons, i.e.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm.L.R.(2d) 38 (T.D.), and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm.L.R.(2d) 48; 36 Admin. L.R. 235 (T.D.). Those key issues are:
(i) is the applicant in question accomplished in her or his field?,
(ii) can she or he teach in that field?, and
(iii) can she or he be self-employed in the chosen profession?
[21]
On the basis of those criteria, it is said, Ms. Grube and Mr. Khachatryan qualify as self-employed persons under the
Regulations
. It is urged that in each case they meet the first two criteria, and in assessing the third it is said the visa officer placed undue emphasis on lack of experience as a self-employed person. Moreover, the officer failed to give sufficient consideration to their potential contributions to the cultural or artistic life of Canada. In doing so, counsel for the applicants submits, the visa officer erred in law.
[22]
In addition, it is urged that the visa officer erred in the manner of assessing their financial assets in relation to their business plans, and in requiring Mr. Khachatryan to have international status, and to provide evidence to that effect, and in other stipulated respects, in order to gain permanent resident status.
[23]
Section 2(1) of the
Regulations
defines a self-employed person as follows:
"2(1) In these Regulations,
. . . . .
"'self-employed person' means an immigrant who intends and has the ability to establish or purchase a business in Canada that will create an employment opportunity for himself and will make a significant contribution to the economy or the cultural or artistic life of Canada;"
Paragraph 8(1)(b) of the
Regulations
provides for applicants to be assessed in the self-employed category of persons:
"8(1) Subject to section 11.1, for the purpose of determining whether an immigrant and the immigrant's dependants, other than a member of the family class, a Convention refugee seeking resettlement or an immigrant who intends to reside in the Province of Quebec, will be able to become successfully established in Canada, a visa officer shall assess that immigrant or, at the option of the immigrant, the spouse of that immigrant,
. . . . .
(b) in the case of an immigrant who intends to be a self-employed person in Canada, on the basis of each of the factors listed in column I of Schedule I, other than the factor set out in item 5 thereof;"
[24]
In
Ho
, supra, Associate Chief Justice Jerome dealt with an applicant who had applied to enter Canada as a self-employed musician, but who was rejected because the applicant was not internationally recognized and had no experience as a music teacher. Associate Chief Justice Jerome stated:
"... I have difficulty with an interpretation of the telex which applies international recognition criteria to music teaching applicants in an effort to keep them out based on possible negative effects on the job market, when the same telex goes on to specify that if music teachers have experience and adequate English, there are good opportunities for work. In any event, I think there is a more substantial basis for granting the relief sought.
. . . . .
"I am convinced that the visa officer interpreted the
Regulations
in such a narrow fashion as to render qualification virtually impossible and as a result, treated the applicant unfairly. The analysis appears to me to require consideration of three questions. First, is the applicant an accomplished musician (in which international recognition ought to be of great assistance)? Second, can he teach? Third can he be self-employed as a teacher? It is obvious that the applicant was successful in the first two and by inference at least, somewhat successful in the third. His only apparent failure in respect to the third issue is the finding of a lack of actual experience as a self-employed teacher. By placing undue emphasis on the lack of experience as a self-employed teacher, the visa officer allowed that partial failure on the third issue to override success on the other two, an interpretation that made it almost impossible for this applicant to succeed. Accordingly, there has been a fundamental breach of the duty of fairness to this applicant which is sufficient to warrant the relief sought."
Earlier, in
Yang
, supra, the Associate Chief Justice found that lack of formal business experience as a self-employed music teacher was not to be given undue emphasis when determining whether an applicant is likely to become successfully established in Canada as a self-employed person.
[25]
In my view, in the case before me the visa officer placed undue emphasis on the lack of past business experience as a self-employed person when assessing the applications of each of Ms. Grube and Mr. Khachatryan. That experience, as a self-employed person, may well be a factor to be favourably considered when determining whether an applicant is likely to become successfully established as a self-employed person in Canada, but it is not the sole criterion to be considered, and it must be considered in light of the occupation sought to be undertaken in Canada. It may be of greater significance in relation to certain occupations than it is to others.
[26]
In the circumstances here, the visa officer stated in the letters of April 13, 1995 that he would not grant favourable consideration to Ms. Grube's or Mr. Khachatryan's application for permanent residence unless documentation related to past business records and to past experience as self-employed persons was provided. In my view, those statements indicate that the visa officer placed undue emphasis on past experience. Indeed, the lack of past experience was determinative of the decision in each case, as the visa officer indicated that it was only through adducing such evidence that these two applicants could succeed. As in
Ho
, this undue emphasis on past experience made it virtually impossible for the applicants to succeed in their applications.
[27]
In addition, I am persuaded that the visa officer here placed undue emphasis on the lack of evidence of an international reputation of Mr. Khachatryan. Although an international reputation may be an asset of assistance in indicating that an applicant is likely to become successfully established in Canada, there is no requirement that an applicant possess such a reputation to be admitted to Canada as a self-employed teacher of music. In my view, by stating that favourable consideration could not be given to Mr. Khachatryan's application without evidence of an international reputation, the visa officer erred.
[28]
For these reasons, orders were issued providing that these applications for judicial review were allowed and the matters should be sent back for redetermination by a different visa officer.
[29]
Counsel were invited to agree on terms for reconsideration of these applications for admission to Canada as permanent residents in the self-employed class. They were unable to agree. The term "self-employed person" is defined in the
Regulations
but only in general terms relating to the intent and ability of the prospective immigrant, "to establish or purchase a business in Canada that will create an employment opportunity for [the immigrant] and will make a significant contribution to the economy or the cultural or artistic life of Canada". Assessing that intent and ability is then to be done in accord with the factors listed in column I of Schedule I other than factor 5. Little or no guidance is provided by the
Regulations
about the process of assessing those factors.
[30]
The court is reluctant to attempt to describe in any greater detail than do the
Regulations
how the various factors are to be assessed. In part, that is because the relevance of particular factors and their relative significance may well vary from one occupation of self-employment to another. Moreover, the establishment of general guidelines for dealing with a multitude of cases is a matter for determination by the Governor-in-Council under regulations, or the Minister and his or her staff in administering the
Act
and
Regulations
. It is not a function of the court. The court's appropriate role is judicial review of individual decisions made under the
Act
, in light of the
Act
and the
Regulations
, the principles of natural justice where applicable, and of fairness. One general rule of thumb that may be stated is that unfairness in the process or unreasonable assessment of relevant factors under the
Act
and in light of the self-employment business planned by the applicant, will render the decision likely to be set aside.
[31]
For example, in these cases there is no reasoned explanation by the visa officer of the significance of the particulars suggested as evidence of past business experience of each of the applicants, in self-employment as a teacher, or of the significance of an international reputation as a performer in connection with Mr. Khachatryan's application. It was unreasonable to insist upon those as essential criteria for assessment of the applicants under Column I of Schedule I of the
Act
.
[32]
In the result, after consultation with counsel, in writing, in regard to the terms of appropriate orders in regard to these applications for judicial review, which were allowed, this court ordered that the applications be reconsidered by a different visa officer in accordance with the law. Further, in reconsidering the applications it is ordered that that be done, considering all relevant factors (including those set out in the Schedule to the
Act
, pursuant to the
Regulations
). In doing so, the visa officer concerned shall consider all evidence submitted by each applicant and she or he may not limit the nature of evidence which may be adduced by the applicant in relation to qualifications, or experience in business or relevant activities, or in relation to international or local standing or reputation, or in relation to financial resources necessary for self-employment in the nature of that intended by the applicant.
[33]
In other words the visa officer may not stipulate that certain information or evidence, not set out by regulations or lawful guidelines, is required for consideration of an application for admission as a self-employed person. The only test for excluding evidence submitted shall be its relevance, in relation to the factors to be assessed and the required abilities as established by the
Regulations
, and in relation to self-employment of the kind proposed by the applicant in each case.
[34]
An order with summary general directions was issued in each case for these reasons. The terms of the order in the application of Ms. Grube and her family, include the following clause:
"In reconsidering the application the visa officer concerned shall consider all relevant factors as well as evidence submitted by the applicant, but the visa officer, acting within lawful guidelines, may not limit the nature of evidence which could be adduced by the applicant relating to prior business experience or make unreasonable requirements for business experience and financial resources necessary for self-employment in the nature of that intended by the applicant."
In the order issued in relation to the application of Mr. Khachatryan and his family a similar clause, but also precluding insistence upon unreasonable requirements, not only for business experience and financial resources, but also for international reputation or standing, as necessary for self-employment in the nature of that intended by the applicant.
[35]
I direct that a copy of these reasons be filed on each of the two court files here considered.
Applications allowed.
Editor: David Weir/slm
[End of document]