[1]
Pinard, J.
: This is an application for infringement in respect of Canadian Patent Nos. 940,751 and 1,161,866 and in respect of copyrights in technical drawings in connection with Canadian Patent No. 940,751 and the lithographic plates from which the said technical drawings were reproduced.
[2]
The plaintiff is a corporation incorporated under the laws of the State of Delaware, U.S.A. and has a principal place of business at 1 East Wacker Drive, Chicago, Illinois, 60601, U.S.A.
[3]
The defendant, Y. Boissonneault & Fils Inc., is a corporation incorporated under the laws of the Province of Quebec, Canada and has a principal place of business at 803 Rang 4 Est, Val-Alain, Lotbinière, Quebec, Canada, G0S 3H0. The defendant, Safety Impact Road Inc., is a corporation incorporated under the laws of Canada and has a principal place of business at 803 Rang 4 Est, Val-Alain, Lotbinière, Quebec, Canada, G0S 3H0. Finally, the defendant, Yvon Boissonneault, is an individual residing in the Province of Quebec, Canada whose address is 803 Rang 4 Est, Val-Alain, Lotbinière, Quebec, Canada, G0S 3H0.
[4]
The plaintiff is and always has been the owner of Canadian Letters Patent No. 940,751, dated January 29, 1974, entitled "Cell Sandwich Impact Attenuation Device" and of Canadian Letters Patent No. 1,161,866, dated February 7, 1984, entitled "Shear Action and Compression Energy Absorber".
[5]
In addition, the plaintiff is the owner of the copyright in technical drawings that are the subject of numerous Certificates of Registration of Copyright bearing Registration Nos. 384,404 to 384,428 inclusive. Those drawings were photolithographically reproduced in one or more of booklets published by the plaintiff, and the latter alleges it is also the owner of the copyright in the lithographic plates from which the said technical drawings in the said manuals were reproduced.
[6]
With regard to the patents in suit, the plaintiff limited the scope of its infringement action to claims 1, 2, 6, 16, 17 and 18 of Canadian Letters Patent No. 940,751 and claims 1, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12 and 13 of Canadian Letters Patent No. 1,161,866. The defendants deny they have infringed any of the claims of the said patents. They also deny they have infringed any of plaintiff's copyrights. Furthermore, by their defence and counterclaim, the defendants have launched a two-pronged attack upon the validity of the patents.
[7]
The first ground of attack involves consideration of s. 34 of the Patent Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. P-4; it is contended specifically that Canadian Patent No. 940,751 does not clearly and precisely describe the "collapsible, energy absorbing and dissipating means" which it refers to, and that Canadian Patent No. 1,161,866 does not set forth clearly the method of constructing or the process involved in filling up, as it states, each "energy absorbing sheet" with "filler means for filling said cell areas" before placing each such sheet "in a stacked relation". The second ground of attack includes the defences of anticipation, lack of utility, obviousness and lack of inventive steps in light of the common knowledge of the art.
[8]
At the beginning of trial, it was agreed and ordered that any question as to the extent of the infringement of any right, any question as to the damages flowing from the infringement of any right, and any question as to the profits arising from any infringement of any right would be the subject of a reference under rule 500 et seq. after trial, if it then appeared that such issues need to be decided.
I. Canadian Patents Nos. 940,751 and 1,161,866
[9]
First, I intend to deal with and dispose of the issues in relation to Canadian Patents Nos. 940,751 and 1,161,866.
(A) The Claimed Inventions
[10]
With regard to Canadian Patent No. 940,751 (Cell Sandwich Impact Attenuation Device), according to the disclosure in the patent, the main objects of the invention are described as follows:
"This invention relates to constructions for protecting fixed structures from damage resulting from colliding vehicles or the like. More particularly, this invention relates to a reusable impact attenuation device designed to absorb and harmlessly dissipate the energy of impact of a colliding vehicle or the like with a fixed structure along or near a highway, such as a bridge abutment, parapet, sign or light stanchion or the like.
"It is known to put rigid guard rails and similar immovable protective devices alongside vehicular traffic routes such as high speed highways for the purpose of preventing cars, buses, trucks and other vehicles from colliding with fixed structures such as abutments, columns, and sign supports, for example, which may be positioned near or adjacent to such vehicular traffic routes. Common practice is to place a rigid railing between the vehicular traffic route and the fixed structure to deflect the automobile in such a manner that the automobile, or other vehicle, avoids direct impact with the fixed structure. Such devices are of only limited value since they do not attempt to decelerate the vehicle at a controlled, safe rate to provide maximum safety and minimum injury to the occupants of the impacting vehicle. Further, such devices result in the impacting vehicle being thrown back on the highway where it may collide with other moving vehicles.
"The present invention utilizes, in part, devices for absorbing or dissipating the kinetic energy of a moving body which are described in the patent application of John W. Rich, now U.S. Patent No. 3,203,600, titled 'Liquid Filled Buffer for Absorbing Kinetic Energy'. A portion of the individual buffer members described in said application, or buffer members somewhat similar thereto, form part of the construction of this invention. Further, this invention is an improvement over the device disclosed in the patent application of Grant W. Walker and Duane B. Ford, now U.S. Patent No. 1,680,662, titled 'Diaphragm Buffer Protective Construction'.
"It has been discovered that on improved energy absorbing and dissipating device for protecting stationary structures from damage due to impacting vehicles, while safely bringing the vehicle to a controlled-deceleration stop, can be provided utilizating clusters of energy absorbing buffer members or cells arranged in chambers which sandwich or telescope into each other upon impact, whereby said chambers are partly formed by lateral extending fender panels which aid in properly redirecting the car after lateral impact on the side of the protective device. Accordingly, it is a principal object of this invention to provide a novel construction for protecting a stationary structure which includes at least a cluster of energy absorbing and dissipating buffer elements each arranged in a plurality of chambers defined by diaphragms and laterally extending fender panels such that an edge of each fender panel overlaps one of said diaphragms permitting said chambers to collapsibly telescope into one another upon impact of a vehicle with the protective construction whereby the energy of impact is absorbed and dissipated by the buffer members and the mass of the construction itself.
. . . . .
"An additional object of the invention is to provide greater control in positioning the resisting mass of the unit and in diminishing its effect upon the vehicle during deceleration.
"Still another object of the present invention is to provide an improved impact attenuation device which produces a satisfactory deceleration wave upon impact.
"A further object of the present invention is to provide an impact attenuation device comprising laterally disposed fender panels to effectively deflect an impacting vehicle away from a protected stationary structure at a low angle relative to the normal direction of vehicle travel.
"An additional object of the present invention is to provide an impact attenuation device comprising restraining and pull-out cable means attached to various members thereof which resist deformation of such device when impacted laterally by a colliding vehicle."
[11]
The claims in dispute in the patent read as follows:
"1. An impacting absorbing safety buffer device for a fixed structure comprising:
a rigid backing member adapted to be positioned adjacent said fixed structure;
collapsible, energy absorbing and dissipating means comprising a plurality of individual elements positioned in an ordered array extending forwardly of said backing member;
diaphragm means comprising a plurality of individual diaphragm members interposed in said array at spaced intervals and with the opposed ends of at least preselected ones of said diaphragm members extending laterally outward of said array of individual elements;
fender means comprising panel members pivotally coupled to the oppose ends of said selected diaphragm members, said panel members extending rearwardly from their associated diaphragm member and partially overlapping the panel members associated with the succeeding diaphragm member; and
nonrigid means interconnecting said backing member and said diaphragm means.
"2. The impact absorbing safety buffer device of Claim 1 wherein:
said diaphragm means and said fender means are constructed to telescope into each other upon impact;
and said panel members of said fender means are normally biased into engagement with the panel members of the succeeding diaphragm member.
. . . . .
"6. The impact absorbing safety buffer device of Claim 1 wherein:
said nonrigid means includes a restraining cable structure rigidly anchored at one end in advance of the forwardmost one of said diaphragm members and at its opposite end to said rigid backing member and passing through apertures in said diaphragm means to guide and control the movement of said diaphragm means during impact.
. . . . .
"16. An impact absorbing safety buffer device for a fixed structure comprising:
a rigid backing member adapted to be secured adjacent said fixed structures;
a plurality of spaced, substantially vertically disposed diaphragm members with laterally disposed fender members pivotally attached to two vertical sides of said diaphragm members;
said diaphragm members being positioned in spaced relation to one another and with said fender members associated with each diaphragm member partially overlapping respective fender members associated with a successive diaphragm member for forming a plurality of chambers spatially disposed in front of said backing member when said fender means are in a longitudinally extensive position;
energy absorbing and dissipating means disposed in said chambers; and
means for interconnecting and partially restraining movement of said diaphragm means consisting essentially of flexible cables.
"17. The impact absorbing safety buffer device of Claim 16 wherein:
said fender means when disposed in said longitudinally extensive position forms a barrier means which effectively deflects a vehicle impacting laterally with said safety buffer device at a substantially low angle measured along the longitudinal extent of said safety buffer device.
"18. The impact absorbing safety buffer device of Claim 16 wherein:
the sides of said fender means facing the direction of impact have a surface composed of a material having a relatively low coefficient of friction."
[12]
For easier understanding, I will include in these reasons for judgment Figures 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8 from the patent.
[13]
Figure 1 purports to depict a side elevational view of the cell sandwich impact attenuation device forming the alleged invention in place protecting an abutment:
[Graph omitted. See original source.]
[14]
Figure 2 purports to depict a top plan view of the impact attenuation device of Figure 1:
[Graph omitted. See original source.]
[15]
Figure 4 purports to depict a top plan view of the impact attenuation device of Figure 1 as it appears after a head-on impact by a moving vehicle or other object:
[Graph omitted. See original source.]
[16]
Figure 5 purports to depict a top plan view of the impact attenuation device of Figure 1 as it appears after a side-angle impact by a moving vehicle or other object:
[Graph omitted. See original source.]
[17]
Figure 6 purports to depict a detailed side elevational view of the restraining cable and back-up plate construction, showing the relative location of the forward diaphragm, interior panels, and slide straps:
[Graph omitted. See original source.]
[18]
Figure 7 purports to depict a detailed side elevational view of the secondary cable and pull-out cable construction of the invention:
[Graph omitted. See original source.]
[19]
Figure 8 purports to depict a detailed view of a typical diaphragm, including fender panel hinges, pull-out cable clips, and restraining cable eye guides:
[Graph omitted. See original source.]
[20]
With regard to Canadian Patent No. 1,161,866 (Shear Action and Compression Energy Absorber), according to the disclosure in the Patent, the objects of the invention are described as follows:
"The invention relates to apparatus and materials for absorbing and dissipating the impact energy of automobiles or other moving vehicles. More particularly, the invention relates to an energy absorbing structure wherein a plurality of sheets having foam-filled cells are arranged in a stack to absorb an impact force. The energy is absorbed when the foam is compressed and when the walls of the sheets cut into one another.
"It has long been known that the impact energy of an automobile may be dissipated if the automobile hits and crushes a deformable structure or material. Thus, it is known in the art that lightweight cement, plastic foam and various fibrous materials may be used to absorb impact energy. Also, various structures such as foam-filled honeycomb arrays have been employed to absorb impact energy by compression.
"Moreover, impact energy may be absorbed by the cutting or shearing of relatively rigid energy absorbing structures. For example, as shown in the U.S. Patent to John W. Rich, No. 3,587,787, a plurality of sheets with intersecting walls may be stacked so that the walls of adjacent sheets cut into one another to dissipate the energy of an incident impact force. It has been found that the energy dissipation of such structures is reduced when a compressive force causes the walls of the sheets to crumple, rather than to cut or shear. Also, the walls of the sheets may expand or contract in response to ambient temperature and moisture conditions and thereby reduce the effectiveness of the energy absorption structure. Moreover, the rigidity and strength of such structures is generally limited and, therefore, the structures may not operate to cut or shear in an optimum manner.
"A preferred energy absorber for high-impact energy vehicles such as automobiles or trucks should uniformly and completely crush in order to absorb a maximum impact energy and should provide a force absorption characteristic that increases as the distance travelled by the impacting vehicle increases. The material of such an absorber should provide a high energy absorption per square inch, so that energy absorbing structures may be made as small as possible.
"Accordingly, it is an object of the invention to provide an energy absorption apparatus and material that is relatively compact and that operates to uniformly and consistently absorb the impact energies of vehicles such as cars and trucks.
"A further object of the invention is to provide an energy absorber that utilizes both shear action and compression to absorb the energy of an impact force.
"Another object of the invention is to provide an energy absorber that utilizes the favorable energy absorption characteristic of cutting or shearing lattices and avoids the shearing inefficiencies presently associated with such structures.
"A further object of the invention is to provide an energy absorption structure wherein stacked sheets with foam-filled honeycomb cells are caused to cut or shear into one another in response to an applied impact force, so that the energy of the impact is uniformly and efficiently dissipated.
"In order to achieve the objects of the invention and to overcome the problems of the prior art, the improved shock absorbing apparatus of the invention includes a plurality of energy absorbing sheets that are arranged in a stacked relation to dissipate the energy of an impact force. Each sheet has an array of intersecting walls that define a plurality of cell areas. A deformable filler material, for example polyurethane foam, fills the cell areas of the sheets.
"In operation, the edges of the walls of abutting sheets are oriented to engage and to cut into one another and into the filler material to dissipate the energy of an impact force. Also, the deformable filler material is crushed to further dissipate the energy of the impact force."
[21]
The claims in dispute in the patent read as follows:
"1. An energy absorbing apparatus comprising:
a plurality of energy absorbing sheets arranged in a stacked relation for compressing and cutting into one another to dissipate the energy of an impact force, each sheet having
an array of intersecting walls for defining a plurality of cell areas, and
filler means for filling said cell areas and adapted to deform to absorb the energy of the impact force and to support said walls so that the edges of the walls of abutting sheets cut into one another and into said filler means in response to said impact force, to dissipate the energy of the impact.
. . . . .
"7. The energy absorbing apparatus of Claim 1 wherein the cell areas of abutting energy absorbing sheets are oriented in an angularly displaced relation for maintaining a uniform inter-sheet cutting action in response to said impact force.
. . . . .
"9. The energy absorbing apparatus of Claim 1 wherein said filler means is a foamed plastic material.
"10. The energy absorbing apparatus of Claim 1 wherein said filler means is a polyurethane foam.
"11. The energy absorbing apparatus of Claim 1 further including:
a plurality of deformable containers, each container having means for holding a plurality of said stacked energy absorbing sheets, and
a retaining frame for supporting a plurality of the loaded deformable containers in alignment and for allowing successive containers to collapse and thereby dissipate said impact force.
"12. The energy absorbing apparatus of Claim 11 wherein said retaining frame includes a plurality of nested retaining units for telescoping in response to an axial impact force to successively crush said supported loaded deformable containers.
"13. The energy absorbing apparatus of Claim 12 wherein said retaining frame has a plurality of legs for slidably supporting the retaining frame on a support surface and each leg includes,
a forwardly extending peg,
a ring slidably engaged with the peg, and
a chain affixed at one end to the ring and at the other end to said support surface for maintaining the leg in a fixed position to resist transverse impact forces and for disengaging from said peg to allow axial sliding movement of the leg in response to an axial impact force."
[22]
For easier understanding, I will also include in these reasons for judgment Figures 1, 4, 6, 7 and 8 from the patent.
[23]
Figure 1 purports to depict a perspective view of two abutting energy absorbing lattice sheets having rectangular cells:
[Graph omitted. See original source.]
[24]
Figure 4 purports to depict a perspective view of two abutting energy absorbing sheets having honeycomb structure of hexagonal, foam-filled cells:
[Graph omitted. See original source.]
[25]
Figure 6 purports to depict a perspective view of a container for the energy absorbing sheets of the invention:
[Graph omitted. See original source.]
[26]
Figure 7 purports to depict a perspective view of a telescoping guard rail retaining frame for the container of Figure 6:
[Graph omitted. See original source.]
[27]
Figure 8 purports to depict a top elevation view of the retaining frame of Figure 7 in a crushed or compressed condition:
[Graph omitted. See original source.]
[28]
Before dealing with the issues of infringement and invalidity, the first task of the court is to construe the specification of the patent according to well-established principles of law. In my view, those principles have been ably summarized by Witford, J., in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  decide exactly what monopoly the patentee has been granted. Today all patents end with claims. The function of the claims is to define the monopoly. The patent, if valid, enables the patentee to stop other people making anything covered by, or using any process covered by, his claim during the life of the patent. One of the important features of the claims is to make it clear to other people what they are not entitled to do during the life of the patent, and the Patents Act expressly provides that the claims must be clear and succinct and must be fairly based upon the matter disclosed in the specification. Before ever you get to the claims of the patent you should find a complete description of the invention, a description of what is going to be claimed. It should be a complete description which will enable anybody, after the patent has expired, to put the invention into practice. These monopolies are granted to encourage people to make inventions and to make the nature and working of them known, and unless a full and fair description is given the patent ought not to be held valid. In the same way, when you get to the claims you ought to be able to know what you may do and what you may not do, and if the claims are incomprehensible or ambiguous, or do not really relate to the invention which has been disclosed in the body of the patent specification, the patent again should not stand valid. It is not to be expected that every patent will be comprehensible to anybody who happens to pick it up, for patents are directed to persons who have skills in the particular fields with which each patent is concerned - the so-called men skilled in the art. The description of the invention has only to be a description sufficient to enable the notional skilled man to put it into practice. Only those familiar in the field in question can be expected to make anything of the claims.
"An understanding of the claims, a determination as to their scope -- what lawyers call the construction of the claim -- is necessarily the first task to be undertaken, and it must be done dispassionately. The claims should be considered without reference to the effect that the giving of any particular meaning may have on any issue of infringement, without reference to the result and effect so far as the attack on validity is concerned. The language used in each claim is in the end determinative, but each claim must be considered against the background of, in the context of, the specification as a whole. The specification itself has to be considered in the context of the general field and they will read it against the knowledge of the prevailing conditions in the field at the time that the patent is granted, and against their knowledge of earlier work which may have been done in this same field."
[29]
I must recall that while the construction of a patent is for the court, the specification (including both disclosure and claims) is directed to a person skilled in the art at the date of the patent and the knowledge such a person is expected to possess is to be taken into consideration (see  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 101 and 104, and Fox, Canadian Patent Law (4th) p. 206). The claims are read as part of the entire patent and not as a separate document.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(2d) 1, the Federal Court of Appeal recognized that resort may be had to the disclosure to assist in interpreting the claims. Indeed, after having reviewed the relevant authorities and the principles applicable in the construction of patents, Mr. Justice Urie, at page 11, summarized those principles as follows:
"In summary, the principles which I derive from the above-mentioned authorities as well as from others referred to in argument, to which further reference need not be made here, are that in construing the claims in a patent recourse to the remainder of the specification is (a) permissible only to assist in understanding terms used in the claims; (b) unnecessary where the words of the claim are plain and unambiguous; and (c) improper to vary the scope or ambit of the claims. There may well be other principles applicable in the construction of claims but the foregoing are those to be borne in mind in dealing with the attacks on the trial judgment in this appeal."
[30]
Applying all those principles to the construction of the patents in suit, it is clear that they each relate to different aspects of crash cushion design. The alleged invention described in Patent 940,751 (the Young patent) generally relates to a structure for absorbing and dissipating impact energy of automobiles and other moving vehicles upon collision with the structure. The alleged invention in Patent 1,161,866 (the Denman patent) is directed to a safety energy absorbing apparatus or energy absorption cartridge for use within a structure of the type described in the Young patent or within an improved system as that illustrated in the Denman patent (the G-R-E-A-T System).
[31]
The structure as defined in claim 1 of the Young patent is the result of the combination of the basic elements described in that claim. The other claims at issue include additional specifications or features. I will deal further with each individual relevant claim as I consider the issues of infringement and invalidity; at this stage, however, looking at those claims as a whole, I interpret them as including together the following essential elements:
(a) a rigid backing member adapted to be positioned and secured adjacent to a fixed structure;
(b) a plurality of spaced, substantially vertically disposed diaphragm members with laterally disposed fender members having a relatively low coefficient of friction and pivotally attached to two vertical sides of the diaphragm members, the diaphragm members being positioned in spaced relation to one another; the fender members associated with each diaphragm members are partially overlapping and normally biased into engagement with respective fender members associated with successive diaphragm members for forming a plurality of chambers spatially disposed in front of the backing member when the fender members are in a longitudinally extensive position, so as to telescope upon impact and so as to deflect a laterally impacting vehicle at a low angle relative to the longitudinal extent of the barrier;
(c) collapsible energy absorbing and dissipating means disposed in the chambers and comprising individual elements positioned in an ordered array extending forwardly of the rigid backing member;
(d) nonrigid means interconnecting the backing member and the diaphragm members, such means including a restraining cable structure rigidly anchored at one end in advance of the foremost of the diaphragm members and at its opposite end to the rigid backing member in passing through apertures in the diaphragm means to guide and control the movement of the diaphragm means during impact; and
(e) means for interconnecting and partially restraining movement of the diaphragm members consisting essentially of flexible cables.
[32]
The energy absorbing apparatus as defined in claim 1 of the Denman patent is the result of the combination of the basic elements described in that claim. The other claims at issue include additional specifications or features. As in the case of the Young patent, I will deal further with each individual relevant claim of the Denman patent as I consider the issues of infringement and invalidity; at this stage, looking at those claims as a whole, I interpret them as including together the following essential elements:
(a) a plurality of energy absorbing sheets arranged in a stacked and preferably angularly displaced relation for compressing and cutting into one another to dissipate the energy of an impact force, each sheet having
(b) an array of intersecting walls for defining a plurality of cell areas, and
(c) filler means, preferably foamed polyurethane plastic, for filling the cell areas and adapted to deform to absorb the energy of the impact force and to support the walls so that the edges of the walls of abutting sheets cut into one another and into the filler means in response to the impact force, to dissipate the energy of the impact;
the energy absorbing apparatus further including:
(d) a plurality of deformable containers, each container having means for holding a plurality of the stacked energy absorbing sheets, and
(e) a retaining frame for supporting a plurality of the loaded deformable containers in alignment and for allowing successive containers to collapse and thereby dissipate the impact force, said retaining frame including a plurality of nested retaining units for telescoping in response to an axial impact force to successively crush the supported loaded deformable containers;
the retaining frame further having:
(f) a plurality of legs for slidably supporting the retaining frame on a support surface, each leg including a forwardly extending peg, a ring slidably engaged with the peg, and a chain affixed at one end to the ring and at the other end to the support surface for maintaining the leg in a fixed position to resist transverse impact forces and for disengaging from the peg to allow axial sliding movement of the leg in response to an axial impact force.
B. Infringement
[33]
The business of the plaintiff is to design, manufacture and sell highway safety apparatus and related products, among the principal ones of which are crash cushions. Among the crash cushions sold by the plaintiff are the "Cell Sandwich System", an early version of which is described in the Young patent, and the "Guard Rail Energy Absorption Terminal (G-R-E-A-T) System" as described in the Denman patent.
[34]
Owen Denman, a co-inventor of the subject matter of the Denman patent in suit, testified as an expert for the plaintiff. Mr. Denman is also the Vice-President, Operations of the plaintiff. Mr. Denman has established that the "Cell Sandwich System" described in the Young patent has been improved since the Young patent issued, notably in the substitution of a Hex-Foam energy absorption cartridge of the type described in the Denman patent for the array of liquid filled cells shown and described in the Young patent, and previously sold commercially as the "Hi-Dro Cell Sandwich System". Mr. Denman explained that the Denman patent is directed in part to the Hex-Foam cartridge which can be used in the "Cell Sandwich System" or in the "G-R-E-A-T System".
[35]
Mr. Denman stated that the latter system as illustrated and described in the Denman patent is substantially identical to the one sold today by the plaintiff, there having been only minor design changes subsequent to the issue of the patent. He also explained that the "G-R-E-A-T System" incorporates into its design a number of the design features found in the earlier Young patent, notably the longitudinal cables, the fish-scale overlapping side fenders, the sequence of bays formed by a series of laterally disposed diaphragm elements that support the fender panels and are able to slide longitudinally along the highway surface permitting longitudinal collapse or telescoping of the apparatus relative to the highway surface without impediment from that surface, and the compression-type energy absorbing device disposed within each bay. The co-inventor Denman went on to explain that the purpose of such crash cushions is to provide a protective buffer in front of immovable objects, such as concrete median dividers or bridge piers, which are located near the travelled roadway. According to him, the distinctive characteristic of both the Young "Cell Sandwich System" and the Denman "G-R-E-A-T System" is that both are capable of longitudinal collapse under frontal impact by a vehicle, thus dissipating the kinetic energy of the colliding vehicle, but are relatively rigid in the lateral direction, providing a noncollapsible redirecting element in the case of glancing side blows. Mr. Denman concluded that "with this desirable combination of characteristics" these crash cushions can thus perform the two protective functions simultaneously. He stated that vehicles striking the crash cushion with a glancing side blow are generally redirected in a direction parallel to the longitudinal axis of the device, thus tending to avoid having the vehicle cross one or more traffic lanes at a sharp angle, without appreciable damage to the crash cushion structure. He also expressed the view that even after a series of glancing blows of this sort, the structure is still readily able to accommodate a frontal collision and to serve its lifesaving function of dissipating the kinetic energy of the oncoming colliding vehicle at a controlled rate within an acceptably short stroke or path of travel from the point of impact towards the fixed object in front of which the crash cushion is placed.
[36]
The problem that Mr. Denman was faced with when he became Director of Engineering of the plaintiff, in the spring of 1979, was to devise a system that would acceptably decelerate an 1800 lb. car in a 60 miles per hour head-on collision with the crash cushion. Of the products sold by the plaintiff, Mr. Denman found the one that most nearly accommodated the frontal collision of an 1800 lb. car was the "G-R-E-A-T System" as it then existed. The system was much like that described in the Denman patent with the exception that instead of the Hex-Foam energy absorbing cartridge used in the "G-R-E-A-T System" as described in the Denman patent, the energy absorbing device was made of a relatively light vermiculite concrete, and was known commercially as the Hi-Dri cartridge. Each bay was provided with a block containing cells of the vermiculite concrete material and weighed about 100 lb. per block.
[37]
Mr. Denman, therefore, concluded that in order to accommodate an 1800 lb. vehicle collision, it was necessary to reduce the total inertial mass of the system. He stated it was evident to him that the structural elements of the "G-R-E-A-T System" crash cushion could not be made very much lighter without weakening the structure and impairing its redirective capability. As cost was also a consideration, Mr. Denman explained that he concentrated on finding a lighter weight substitute for the compression-type energy absorbing material to be mounted in the bays of the "G-R-E-A-T System". By late 1979, after a considerable number of tests were made by Mr. Denman and Dave Gertz, another co-inventor of the subject matter of the Denman patent in suit, they found that a suitable Hex-Foam energy absorbing cartridge of the type described in the Denman patent for use in one of the plaintiff's standard "G-R-E-A-T System" bays could weigh 35 lb. as compared to 100 lb. for the Hi-Dri cartridge of vermiculite concrete that had been previously used in the system. Mr. Denman explained that they were able to reduce the inertial mass of the system appreciably and sufficiently to enable an 1800 lb. car to collide head-on with the system at 60 miles per hour without subjecting the occupants to unacceptably high deceleration. As a result of the superior characteristics of the Hex-Foam cartridge, including much lower costs and easier handling, Mr. Denman indicated that it was readily accepted by the highway safety community and that shortly after the introduction of the Hex-Foam cartridge in the market place, it very quickly replaced the plaintiff's other compression-type energy absorbers.
[38]
Owen Denman's evidence is well corroborated by that of Jarvis D. Michie, a professional engineer who also testified as an expert for the plaintiff. Mr. Michie has been involved in the field of highway safety engineering since 1967. Through his experience generally with crash cushions, he has been aware of the development of the plaintiff's crash cushion system as well as of various alternative systems. Through his work in developing standards for evaluating safety hardware, and in testing such hardware, he has acquired considerable knowledge of the performance criteria for crash cushions and is generally familiar with the structure and design of crash cushions.
[39]
The defendants' expert, Mr. Paul-André Bourassa, an engineer, is titular professor at the Faculty of Sciences of the University of Sherbrooke. Even though he has no experience in the field of crash cushions as such, he was recognized as an expert with regard to the principles of physics involved in the matter. In spite of his qualifications as a mechanical engineer, Mr. Bourassa, unlike Messrs. Denman and Michie, did not have the opportunity to examine crash cushion structures of various kinds or to examine in some detail the results of automobile collisions with crash cushions. It must have been his lack of knowledge of the industry that made him appear to be often hesitant and sometimes even reticent to reach and express an opinion on some of the technical points involved. This being said, the defendants' expert witness disagreed with Mr. Denman's statement to the effect that the "G-R-E-A-T System" now sold by the plaintiff, which is substantially identical to the system as illustrated and described in the Denman patent, incorporates into its design the essential elements as they are defined in Claims 1, 2, 6, 16, 17 and 18 of the Young patent.
[40]
It is in evidence that the individual defendant Yvon Boissonneault is the sole director and officer of the two corporate defendants, and that he personally involved himself in carrying out the activities of his corporations with regard to manufacture and sale of roadway barriers and energy absorbers (crash cushions). The defendant Y. Boissonneault & Fils Inc., prior to the incorporation of the defendant Safety Impact Road Inc., acquired one of the plaintiff's "G-R-E-A-T" crash cushions, installed it, and took steps to imitate it. After the incorporation of Safety Impact Road Inc., the latter manufactured and sold crash cushions that the plaintiff considered to be a direct imitation of its "G-R-E-A-T" crash cushions.
[41]
At trial, learned counsel for the defendants made it clear that the defendants did not dispute the fact that the basic structure of the crash cushion manufactured and sold by Safety Impact Road Inc., i.e., the safety apparatus without the collapsible energy absorbing medium disposed in each of its bays, is substantially identical to the same basic structure of the "G-R-E-A-T" crash cushion as illustrated and described in the Denman patent and now sold with minor design changes by the plaintiff. What in fact the defendants argued is that the "G-R-E-A-T" crash cushion itself (without the energy-absorbing cartridge) is essentially different from the crash cushion (without the energy-absorbing medium disposed in each of its bays) described in the Young patent.
[42]
With regard to infringement, therefore, the first question is whether the defendants' safety apparatus has infringed and is infringing Claims 1, 2, 6, 16, 17 and 18 of Canadian Letters Patent No. 940,751 (the Young patent).
[43]
As indicated above, the defendants acknowledged the fact that their crash cushion is virtually identical to the "G-R-E-A-T" crash cushion now sold by the plaintiff, except for the energy-absorbing cartridges which the defendants alleged to be of a lesser quality in the plaintiff's system than in their own system.
[44]
I will now consider the defendants' safety apparatus in relation to the elements of each claim at issue.
Claim 1
[45]
"An impacting absorbing safety buffer device for a fixed structure comprising:"
[46]
Obviously, the word "impacting" is an error and should read "impact". However, this is an apt description of the defendants' crash cushion.
[47]
"a rigid backing member adapted to be positioned adjacent said fixed structure;"
[48]
The defendants' crash cushion incorporates a steel or concrete back up element.
[49]
"collapsible, energy absorbing and dissipating means comprising a plurality of individual elements positioned in an ordered array extending forwardly of said backing member;"
[50]
A plurality of the defendants' collapsible energy absorbing and dissipating cartridges are arranged in a linear array which extends forwardly of the back up element in the defendants' crash cushion.
[51]
"diaphragm means comprising a plurality of individual diaphragm members interposed in said array at space intervals and with the opposed end of at least preselected ones of said diaphragm members extending laterally outward of said array of individual elements;"
[52]
The individual diaphragm members in the defendants' crash cushion are interposed within the array of energy absorbing cartridges and the diaphragm members all extend laterally outward of the cartridges.
[53]
"fender means comprising panel members pivotally coupled to oppose ends of said selected diaphragm members, said panel members extending rearwardly from their associated diaphragm member and partially overlapping the panel members associated with the succeeding diaphragm member;"
[54]
The front of each fender panel of the defendants' crash cushion is attached to a diaphragm, and extends rearwardly, overlapping the fender panel to the rear. Because the two points of attachment of the fender panel to the diaphragm are in a vertical line, the material of the fender panel acts as a plastic hinge allowing the fender panel to pivot outward slightly as the crash cushion telescopes in the event of a collision. Such pivoting necessarily occurs because the rear ends of the fender panels are wedged apart as the unit telscopes.
[55]
The defendants' expert witness, Mr. Bourassa, argues that the words "pivotally coupled" in the claim ought to be interpreted and the claim construed as requiring the existence of articulated hinges, and not a mere mathematical abstraction such as a plastic hinge. I do not agree. The claim does not require that the panel members be attached to the diaphragm members with pivots and hinges, but that such panel members be coupled to the opposed ends of such diaphragm members so as to be able to pivot. Indeed, "pivotally" is an adverb which is defined: "as on a pivot" (see Shorter Oxford English Dictionary, vol. II, 3rd Ed.). "Pivotally coupled" is a characteristic of function or operation; what the words require, here, is more a specific function than a specific structure.
[56]
Furthermore, as indicated by expert Michie, the use of a plastic hinge is a well-known engineering concept that was discussed, for example, in the 1959 publication Plastic Design in Steel published by the American Institute of Steel Construction. Such plastic hinges have also been previously used in highway safety design, as described in page 305 of the May 1971 Transportation Engineering Journal, copy of which is appended as Exhibit 8 to the Michie affidavit.
[57]
It is clear that the fender panels in the defendants' crash cushion pivot outwardly in plastic hinge mode and are therefore "pivotally coupled" as required by Claim 1.
[58]
"nonrigid means interconnecting said backing member and said diaphragm means."
[59]
The cable passes through a hole in a cable guide which is attached to each of the two first diaphrams in the defendants' crash cushion. The cable is anchored to the ground at the front and rear of the crash cushion, so that the cable does not directly interconnect the backing member with the diaphragms. However, the language of this clause does not specifically require that more than one cable directly interconnect the backing member and each individual diaphragm member. As was well explained by expert Michie, the purpose of the cable is to maintain the crash cushion in alignment in the event of a collision, and possibly to provide some lateral restraint in the event of a transverse collision, and it is immaterial, particularly where the diaphragms are raised on support legs above the ground, whether the rear end of the cable is anchored in the ground or to the backing member. Since the backing member is immovable relative to the ground, it is a matter of convenience whether one chooses the ground or the backing member as an anchored point for the cable. The defendants' cable is anchored at the rear directly to the concrete pad on the ground, in the vicinity of the adjacent steel or concrete back up. Expert Michie showed that the force flow must pass from the crash cushion to the pavement, that this is done via the backing member, and that from a structural engineering point of view, the backing member and pavement comprise a single fixed reference base. So I agree that it is arbitrary under such circumstances whether the cable is connected to the backing member or the pavement. In either case, it affords lateral and vertical stability to the crash cushion.
[60]
I must conclude, therefore, that the defendants' apparatus infringes Claim 1 of the Young patent. Such infringement is obviously textual for each clause of the claim, except perhaps for the last clause which, to say the least, was infringed by a mechanical equivalent.
[61]
Indeed, looking at the said last clause in the context of the whole specification (including both disclosure and claims), it is clear that the inventor realized, as a reader skilled in the art would have realized, at the date of publication of the relevant specification, that the cable needed not be anchored to the rigid backing member itself rather than in the ground, and that the apparatus would work as well if the cable was anchored at close proximity to said backing member and if the backing member was immovably fixed to the ground. It is clear, therefore, that the inventor did not consider that direct anchoring to the backing member was an essential element of the invention. In Catnic Components Limited and another v. Hill and Smith Limited, [1982] R.P.C. 183, the House of Lords stated the principles to be applied in cases where there is no "textual infringement" of a claim in a patent but where another person is ingenious enough to effect an improvement to an invention by a slightly different method. At pages 242 and 243, Lord Diplock stated:
"My Lords, in their closely reasoned written cases in this House and in the oral argument, both parties to this appeal have tended to treat 'textual infringement' and infringement of the 'pith and marrow' of an invention as if they were separate causes of action, the existence of the former to be determined as a matter of construction only and of the latter upon some broader principle of colourable evasion. There is, in my view, no such dichotomy, there is but a single cause of action and to treat it otherwise, particularly in cases like that which is the subject of the instant appeal, is liable to lead to confusion.
. . . . .
"My Lords, a patent specification is a unilateral statement by the patentee, in words of his own choosing, addressed to those likely to have a practical interest in the subject matter of his invention (i.e., 'skilled in the art'), by which he informs them what he claims to be the essential features of the new product or process for which the letters patent grant him a monopoly. It is those novel features only that he claims to be essential that constitute the so-called 'pith and marrow' of the claim. A patent specification should be given a purposive construction rather than a purely literal one derived from applying to it the kind of meticulous verbal analysis in which lawyers are too often tempted by their training to indulge. The question in each case is: whether persons with practical knowledge and experience of the kind of work in which the invention was intended to be used, would understand that strict compliance with a particular descriptive word or phrase appearing in a claim was intended by the patentee to be an essential requirement of the invention so that any variant would fall outside the monopoly claimed, even though it could have no material effect upon the way the invention worked."
[62]
After noting that the question does not arise where it would be obvious to the informed reader at the date of publication of the specification that the variant would have a material effect upon the way the invention worked, Lord Diplock went on to say:
"Where it is not obvious, in the light of then-existing knowledge, the reader is entitled to assume that the patentee thought at the time of the specification that he had good reason for limiting his monopoly so strictly and had intended to do so, even though subsequent work by him or others in the field of the invention might show the limitation to have been unnecessary. It is to be answered in the negative
only when it would be apparent to any reader skilled in the art
that a particular descriptive word or phrase used in a claim
cannot have been intended by a patentee
, who was also skilled in the art, to exclude minor variants which, to the knowledge of both him and the readers to whom the patent was addressed, could have no material effect upon the way in which the invention worked." (Emphasis added)
(See also  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
Claim 2
[63]
"The impact absorbing safety buffer device of Claim 1 wherein:
said diaphragm means and said fender means are constructed to telescope into each other upon impact;
and said panel members of said fender means are normally biased into engagement with the panel members of the succeeding diaphragm member."
[64]
The telescoping action of the defendants' crash cushion is made possible because, as indicated above, the front of each fender panel is attached to a diaphragm, and extends rearwardly, overlapping the fender panel to the rear. The rear of the fender panels are held in contact with the front of the following fender panels by means of mushroom bolts, and the forward panels are supplied with slots which the bolts can slide in. So, in the event of a frontal collision, the forward panels can move rearwardly while the mushroom washers and associated knots and bolts remain fixed in place on the panels immediately behind them. As stated above, each fender panel acts as a plastic hinge allowing the fender panel to pivot outward slightly as the crash cushion telescopes in the event of such a collision.
[65]
I conclude that the defendants' apparatus infringes Claim 2 of the Young patent and that such infringement is textual.
Claim 6
[66]
"The impact absorbing safety buffer device of Claim 1 wherein:
said nonrigid means includes a restraining cable structure rigidly anchored at one end in advance of the forwardmost one of said diaphragm members and at its opposite end to said rigid backing member and passing through apertures in said diaphragm means to guide and control the movement of said diaphragm means during impact."
[67]
The cable of the defendants' crash cushion passes through a hole in a cable guide which is attached to each of the two first diaphragms and functions to restrain transverse movement in a collision. As noted above, at the opposite end of the diaphragm members, the rear end of the cable is anchored in the ground rather than the backing member, but functions exactly as if it were anchored in the backing member because the ground and backing member are both immovable. The diaphragms are raised above the ground on support legs which permit the rear most diaphragm or diaphragms to ride over the end of the cable during a collision, if necessary, without affecting the guiding and restraining function of the cable.
[68]
In my view, this is at least infringement by a mechanical equivalent. As in the case of the last clause of Claim 1, it is clear, in the context of the whole specification (including both disclosure and claims), that the inventor realized, as a reader skilled in the art would have realized, at the date of publication of the relevant specification, that the cable needed not be anchored to the rigid backing member itself rather than in the ground, and that the apparatus would work as well if the cable was anchored at close proximity to said backing member and if the backing member was immovably fixed to the ground. It is clear, therefore, that the inventor did not consider that
direct
anchoring to the backing member was an essential element of the invention. (See Catnic Components Limited and another v. Hill and Smith Limited (supra), and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  structure comprising:
a rigid backing member adapted to be secured adjacent said fixed structures;"
[70]
As in Claim 1, this is an apt description of the defendants' crash cushion which incorporates a steel or concrete back up element.
[71]
"a plurality of spaced, substantially vertically disposed diaphragm members with laterally disposed fender members pivotally attached to two vertical sides of said diaphragm members;
"said diaphragm members being positioned in spaced relation to one another and with said fender members associated with each diaphragm member partially overlapping respective fender members associated with a successive diaphragm member for forming a plurality of chambers spatially disposed in front of said backing member when said fender means are in a longitudinally extensive position;
"energy absorbing and dissipating means disposed in said chambers; and"
[72]
The elements in the defendants' crash cushion corresponding to these limitations have been generally outlined in my consideration of Claim 1 above and are also well-illustrated in the defendants' design manual.
[73]
"means for interconnecting and partially restraining movement of said diaphragm means consisting essentially of flexible cables."
[74]
The defendants use only a single cable which passes through a hole in a cable guide which is attached to each of the two first diaphragms only. In my view, there cannot be here textual infringement of this essential element of the claim because there is only one cable and because it is clear that the diaphragm means are not interconnected. The Shorter Oxford English Dictionary, vol. I, 3rd Ed., defines "interconnect" as follows: "to connect each with the other". Unlike Claim 1 and Claim 6, which refer to nonrigid means interconnecting the backing member on the one hand and the diaphragm means on the other hand, Claim 16 uses the word "interconnecting" in relation to the diaphragm means only. Therefore, each one of the diaphragm means must be physically connected with the other. There must be mutual connection.
[75]
In addition, Claim 16, unlike Claims 1 and 6, does not refer to "nonrigid means" or to "a restraining cable structure", but specifically requires "flexible cables" as essential means for the purpose of interconnecting and partially restraining movement of the diaphragm means.
[76]
In my view, this clause of the claim must only refer to cables such as those referred to in the disclosure of Canadian Patent No. 940,751 at pages 10 and 14.
[77]
At page 10:
"In addition to the aforementioned restraining and secondary cables, two pullout cables 50 are attached to the corners of each diaphragm 30. (Figures 1, 7) For this purpose, cable clamps 52 are provided at the four corners of each diaphragm to which pullout cables 50 are attached. Pullout cables 50 act during a lateral impact to provide an internal compressive force which acts on the buffer elements 18, to which the energy of impact is ultimately transferred for absorption and dissipation. Further, the unit may be substantially returned to its original shape after an impact by applying a tension force to pullout cables 50. Turnbuckles 49 also assist in keeping the pullout cables 50 in a taut condition."
[78]
And at page 14:
"Further resistance to deformation during side angle impacts is afforded by pullout cables 50 which are firmly attached to each diaphragm 30, and prevent movement of said diaphragms in a direction away from each other, thereby maintaining pressure on buffer elements 18 during impact."
[79]
The claim may also include as an
additional
feature restraining and secondary cables such as those referred to in the disclosure at p. 9 [see footnote 1]:
"A series of cables are provided to assist in supporting the impact attenuation device of the present invention, and to further enhance the impact absorbing and dissipating capabilities of the structure. Two restraining cables 40 are securely fastened at a point beyond the forward end of the cell sandwich unit to a fixed cable anchorage 42, and pass through reinforced apertures 44 in movable diaphragms 30 (figures 6, 8).
. . . . .
"Restraining cables 40 rise from cable anchorage 42 in a vertical plane to the third diaphragm 30 counting from and including the forward diaphragm, passing through apertures 44 in all diaphragms through which the restraining cables pass. From the third diaphragm, restraining cables 40 pass through apertures 44 of the remaining diaphragms, and are ultimately firmly anchored to cable fastening means 14. In the horizontal plane, as seen in Figure 2, restraining cables 40 extend inwardly from cable anchor 42 to the forward diaphragm 30, from where they flare outwardly to fastening means 14. This flared traverse of restraining cables 40 assists in maintaining the cell sandwich unit in place during lateral impacts."
[80]
In the defendants' crash cushion, the diaphragm means are interconnected by the fender panels to which they are pivotally attached by bolts; the fender panels overlap one another and are held in contact by means of mushroom bolts. The diaphragm means are clearly not interconnected by flexible cables which are specifically described in the clause as being essential.
[81]
In that context, I must conclude not only that there is no textual infringement of Claim 16, but also that there is no infringement by a mechanical equivalent. Applying here the principles stated in Catnic Components Limited and another v. Hill and Smith Limited (supra), I consider that the claim clearly requires that the apparatus for the crash cushion comprises flexible
cables
for interconnecting (i.e., "connecting each with the other") and partially restraining movement of
all
the diaphragm means. It cannot be otherwise interpreted.
Claim 17
[82]
"The impact absorbing safety buffer device of Claim 16 wherein:
said fender means when disposed in said longitudinally extensive position forms a barrier means which effectively deflects a vehicle impacting laterally with said safety buffer device at a substantially low angle measured along the longitudinal extent of said safety buffer device."
[83]
This claim adds to the preceding one a feature that has been well-established as being an important characteristic of both substantially identical systems, the defendants' crash cushion and the plaintiff's "G-R-E-A-T" crash cushion. However, as I have found that there is no infringement of Claim 16, I must conclude likewise in respect of this dependent claim.
Claim 18
[84]
"The impact absorbing safety buffer device of Claim 16 wherein:
the sides of said fender means facing the direction of impact have a surface composed of a material having a relatively low coefficient of friction."
[85]
This claim also adds a feature to the apparatus described in Claim 16 above. This feature is found in the defendants' crash cushion, the fender panels of which are made of steel, which has a relatively low coefficient of friction.
[86]
However, as this claim is also dependent of Claim 16, I must conclude that it has not been infringed by the defendants.
[87]
The second question with respect to infringement is whether the defendants' energy absorber or energy absorption cartridge, as it is made and as it is used, has infringed and is infringing Claims 1, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12 and 13 of Canadian Letters Patent No. 1,161,866 (Denman patent).
Claim 1
[88]
"An energy absorbing apparatus comprising ..."
[89]
This is the defendants' energy-absorbing cartridge which is described and illustrated in Canadian Patent 1,238,809 issued to the defendant Yvon Boissonneault.
[90]
"a plurality of energy absorbing sheets arranged in a stacked relation for compressing and cutting into one another to dissipate the energy of an impact force, each sheet having ..."
[91]
This is obviously the case in the defendants' cartridge, as it appears from the stacked arrangement in the exploded view depicted in figure 2 of Canadian Patent No. 1,238,809 above:
[Graph omitted. See original source.]
an array of intersecting walls for defining a plurality of cells areas, and ...
[92]
This is also the case in the defendants' cartridge as clearly depicted in figure 2 above.
[93]
"filler means for filling said cells areas and adapted to deform to absorb the energy of the impact force and to support said walls so that the edges of the walls of abutting sheets cut into one another and into said filler means in response to said impact force, to dissipate the energy of the impact."
[94]
The defendants' cells are filled with polyfoam, which performs the functions stated in this clause. Furthermore, the defendants have admitted on examination for discovery that in their cartridge the layers of cardboard lattice intersect one another and that the cartridge crushes and is destroyed upon impact.
[95]
The defendants argue that their foam or cartridge as sold is more homogeneous and more resilient than the plaintiff's foam or cartridge as sold. I agree with the plaintiff's view that this is not the issue. The issue is whether the defendants have taken what the plaintiff has claimed in its patent, which is exactly what they have done with respect to this claim.
[96]
I must conclude that there is textual infringement of Claim 1 of the Denman patent.
Claim 7
[97]
"The energy absorbing apparatus of Claim 1 wherein the cell areas of abutting energy absorbing sheets are oriented in an angularly displaced relation for maintaining a uniform inter-sheet cutting action in response to said impact force."
[98]
As can be seen in figure 2 of Canadian Patent No. 1,238,809 above, the orientation of a given layer of cells is 90 [degrees] to the orientation of the cells of the layer on either side of it. The infringement is therefore textual.
Claim 9
[99]
"The energy absorbing apparatus of Claim 1 wherein said filler means is a foamed plastic material."
[100]
This is obviously the case in the defendants' energy absorbing cartridge. Hence, the textual infringement of Claim 9.
Claim 10
[101]
"The energy absorbing apparatus of Claim 1 wherein said filler means is a polyurethane foam."
[102]
The evidence shows that at least some of the defendants' energy absorbing cartridges are made of polyurethane foam. Therefore, there is textual infringement.
Claim 11
[103]
"The energy absorbing apparatus of Claim 1 further including:
a plurality of deformable containers, each container having means for holding a plurality of said stacked energy absorbing sheets, and
a retaining frame for supporting a plurality of the loaded deformable containers in alignment and for allowing successive containers to collapse and thereby dissipate said impact force."
[104]
The defendants' energy absorbing cartridge has a deformable container of woven plastic. The defendants' crash cushion in which the cartridges are used includes a retaining frame with side fender panels and a plurality of transverse diaphragms. Between each pair of diaphragms, in a line, are interposed the cartridges, in their woven plastic containers. This retaining frame allows the cartridges to collapse in the event of a collision.
[105]
Here, again I must conclude that there is textual infringement.
Claim 12
[106]
"The energy absorbing apparatus of Claim 11 wherein said retaining frame includes a plurality of nested retaining units for telescoping in response to an axial impact force to successively crush said supported loaded deformable containers."
[107]
It is well-established that the defendants used their cartridges with an apparatus or crash cushion substantially similar to the "G-R-E-A-T System" apparatus manufactured and sold by the plaintiff. As shown when I considered the issue of infringement of the Young patent, it is clear that the defendants' apparatus literally infringes dependent Claim 12.
Claim 13
[108]
"The energy absorbing apparatus of Claim 12 wherein said retaining frame has a plurality of legs for slidably supporting the retaining frame on a support surface and each leg includes,
a forwardly extending peg,
a ring slidably engaged with the peg, and
a chain affixed at one end to the ring and at the other end to said support surface for maintaining the leg in a fixed position to resist transverse impact forces and for disengaging from said peg to allow axial sliding movement of the leg in response to an axial impact force."
[109]
Each diaphragm of the defendants' crash cushion has a pair of legs which are provided with skates and may slide across the ground. Each leg includes a peg or protrusion and a ring. The evidence also shows that in a collision, the rings may slide off the pegs. Each ring is attached to a chain, the other end of which is attached to an angle iron fixed to the ground. It is clear that the chain functions to restrain transverse movement of the crash cushion, but in a head-on or axial collision, the diaphragms may move in the direction of the colliding vehicle and the rings become disengaged from the pegs.
[110]
As for all the other claims at issue with respect to the Denman patent, I have adopted expert Michie's infringement analysis which is strongly supported by the evidence and which has not been significantly displaced by anything alleged by the defendants' expert witness.
[111]
In conclusion, I find that there has been textual infringement of each one of the claims at issue in Canadian Patent No. 1,161,866.
(C) Validity
[112]
It is common ground that by reason of the presumption of validity of a patent provided by s. 45 of the Act, the onus falls upon the defendants to prove their allegations of invalidity. This onus is not an easy one to discharge.
[113]
In  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at page 129, the president of the Exchequer Court of Canada had this to say:
"It must follow from the provision of the Act that a patent granted under it 'shall thereafter be prima facie valid' and avail its grantee and his legal representatives for the term of the patent that the onus of showing that it is invalid lies on the person attacking it, no matter what the ground of attack may be, and that until it has been shown to be invalid the statutory presumption of its validity remains.
"This does not mean that the patent is immune from attack or that the patentee is free from the obligations that are incumbent on him by way of consideration for the grant of the patent monopoly to him, but it seems clear that, since Parliament has deliberately endowed a patent granted under the Act with a presumption of validity, the onus of showing that such a patent is invalid is not an easy one to discharge."
[114]
(See also  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(2d) 1, at page 24,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at page 44, and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 207, at page 229).
(a) Section 34 of the Patent Act
[115]
In my view, the defendants have failed to establish that the claims of the patents in suit are obscure and ambiguous, that the inventors did not describe fully and correctly the inventions and their operation, and that the claims are broader than their inventions. As indicated at the beginning of these reasons, these attacks are limited in scope and are aimed at a specific provision in each one of the two patents in suit.
[116]
First, the defendants contend specifically that Canadian Patent No. 940,751 does not clearly and precisely describe the "collapsible energy absorbing and dissipating means" which it refers to in the claims at issue. Expert Bourassa says that such means could include useless and unsafe materials such as bricks and broken glass.
[117]
I must recall that the claims (as well as the disclosure) are directed to a person skilled in the art and the knowledge such person is expected to possess is to be taken into consideration. The claims must be construed by a mind willing to understand, not desirous of misunderstanding.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(2d) 145, Dickson, J. (as he then was), interpreted s. 36 (now 34) of the Act as follows, at page 157:
"Section 36(1) seeks an answer to the questions: 'What is your invention? How does it work?' With respect to each question the description must be correct and full in order that, as Thorson, P., said in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  130:
'... when the period of the monopoly has expired the public will be able, having only the specification, to make the same successful use of the invention as the inventor could at the time of his application.'
"We must look to the whole of the disclosure and the claims to ascertain the nature of the invention and methods of its performance ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 9 Fox Pat. C. 165 [affirmed 15 C.P.R. 133; 12 Fox Pat. C. 123]), being neither benevolent nor harsh, but rather seeking a construction which is reasonable and fair to both patentee and public. There is no occasion for being too astute or technical in the matter of objections to either title or specification for, as Duff, C.J.C., said, giving the judgment of the court in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at p. 574: 'where the language of the specification, upon a reasonable view of it, can be so read as to afford the inventor protection for that which he has actually in good faith invented, the court, as a rule, will endeavour to give effect to that construction'. Sir George Jessel spoke to like effect at a much earlier date in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  anxiety to support a really useful invention'."
[118]
The relevant claims in the Young patent are in relation to an "impact absorbing
safety
buffer device", not for an unsafe device. Various materials were known at the time of the patent that were suitable for use as "collapsible, energy absorbing and dissipating means", including water-filled containers, crushable empty cans, etc. In my view, a person skilled in the art would have no difficulty in selecting suitable materials and rejecting unsuitable ones. Furthermore, the patent is not directed to the invention of any particular energy-absorbing material; rather, it is directed to a combination of structural elements with an energy-absorbing material. Any suitable energy-absorbing material may be chosen. I must, therefore, reject the defendants' first ground of attack with respect to the Young patent.
[119]
Then the defendants contend that Canadian Patent No. 1,161,866 does not set forth clearly the method of constructing or the process involved in filling up, as it states, each "energy absorbing sheet" with "filler means for filling said cell arrays" before placing each such sheet "in a stacked relation".
[120]
In my view, the point that the Denman patent does not teach the reader how to fill the cells of the lattice sheets with polyfoam is not a valid one. The Denman patent does not teach how to make foam any more than it teaches how to make paper or cardboard. As argued by learned counsel for the plaintiff, what is already known need not be described. Given the prior knowledge of paper lattices and polyfoam, the Denman patent teaches how these may be combined and arranged to advantage as an energy-absorbing material suitable for use in a crash cushion.
[121]
Here, giving the specification in each patent in suit a purposive rather than purely literal construction does not result in ambiguity. On the contrary, upon a reasonable view of the language of the patents, I have no hesitation in finding that a full and fair description of the inventions has been given and that the claims relate to those inventions. In my view, the requirements of s. 34 of the Act have been fully complied with and I must therefore reject the objections made by the defendants in that regard.
(b) Anticipation, lack of utility,
obviousness and lack of inventive steps
[122]
With respect to anticipation, I consider it appropriate, here, to refer to the interpretation given by the Federal Court of Appeal for former s. 28(1)(b) (now s. 27(1)(b)) of the Patent Act, in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 289, at page 297 C.P.R.:
"The relevant statutory provision for the purpose of assessing the plea of anticipation in the present proceedings is para. 28(1)(b) of the Patent Act. That paragraph directs an inquiry as to whether the claimed invention is
'28(1) ...
(b) ... described in any patent or in any publication printed in Canada or in any other country more than two years before presentation of the petition ...'
"The petition which resulted in the issuance of plaintiff's Canadian patent was filed November 26, 1973, so the relevant date for the purposes of the present inquiry is November 26, 1971.
"It will be recalled that anticipation, or lack of novelty, asserts that the invention has been made known to the public prior to the relevant time. The inquiry is directed to the very invention in suit and not, as in the case of obviousness, to the state of the art and to common general knowledge. Also, as appears from the passage of the statute quoted above, anticipation must be found in a specific patent or other published document; it is not enough to pick bits and pieces from a variety of prior publications and to meld them together so as to come up with the claimed invention. One must, in effect, be able to look at a prior, single publication and find in it all the information which, for practical purposes, is needed to produce the claimed invention without the exercise of any inventive skill. The prior publication must contain so clear a direction that a skilled person reading and following it would in every case and without possibility of error be led to the claimed invention. Where, as here, the invention consists of a combination of several known elements, any publication which does not teach the combination of all the elements claimed cannot possibly be anticipatory."
[123]
In the present case, anticipation related to prior knowledge and use by other persons, as well as that related to prior publications or prior patents, was pleaded but not argued by the defendants. As there is nothing more in the evidence to suggest that the defendants could seriously and realistically rely on this validity related defence, it will be rejected.
[124]
The defence of lack of utility is made with respect to the Young patent only. The defendants specifically contend that the capability of the Young crash cushion to redirect a vehicle striking the crash cushion with a glacing side blow is limited; their expert Mr. Bourassa suggests that there may be pocketing or unwanted deflection of the vehicle; he also claims that there may be a tendency of the diaphragms to bind against the cables.
[125]
According to the plaintiff's experts, who both witnessed live crash tests involving crash cushions having the combination of features disclosed in the Young patent, such is not the experience. As expert Bourassa's views are unsubstantiated by any actual observations or tests, I consider they are not valid. But even if they were valid, I agree with the plaintiff's view that they would not undermine the utility of the Young crash cushion which, even though limited in its ability to protect a driver of a vehicle from injury, may nonetheless decelerate or redirect a striking vehicle so as to save lives and also avoid more serious injuries. The fact that such crash cushions have been installed on highways for the purpose of assuring that kind of protection for the drivers of vehicles, as shown by expert Michie's evidence, is further proof of utility.
[126]
As for the defence of obviousness and lack of inventive steps, the arguments are obviously directed more to the Denman patent than the Young patent.
[127]
Indeed, no specific issue of obviousness and of lack of inventive steps of the Young patent is pleaded in the "Plaidoyer et demande reconventionnelle amendés" and no specific prior art is relied upon by the defendants in those respects. Expert Michie states in his affidavit that the plaintiff's water-cell sandwich system (of the type described in the Young patent) was the first to exhibit both frontal and side impact capabilities. The Young patent discloses a crash cushion having a combination of specific features and the defendants' expert witness nowhere suggests that this combination of features was previously known or suggested in the prior art.
[128]
With regard to the Denman patent, the defendants have listed a number of patents and publications as being prior art. The defendants essentially argue that polyfoam was previously known, intersecting lattice structures were previously known, and filling lattice structures with polyfoam was previously known.
[129]
The Federal Court of Appeal set out the test for obviousness in two decisions, as follows:
1.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(2d) 1, per Urie, J., at 27:
"The question to be answered is whether at the date of invention (August-September 1964) an unimaginative skilled technician, in light of his general knowledge and the literature and information on the subject available to him on that date, would have been led directly and without difficulty to Gaiser's invention."
2.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 289, per Hugessen, J., at 294:
"The test for obviousness is not to ask what competent inventors did or would have done to solve the problem. Inventors are by definition inventive. The classical touchstone for obviousness is the technician skilled in the art but having no scintilla of inventiveness or imagination; a paragon of deduction and dexterity, wholly devoid of intuition; a triumph of the left hemisphere over the right. The question to be asked is whether this mythical creature (the man in the Clapham omnibus of patent law) would, in the light of the state of the art and of common general knowledge as at the claimed date of invention, have come directly and without difficulty to the solution taught by the patent. It is a very difficult test to satisfy."
[130]
The prior art principallly referred to by the defendants was present before the examiner in the Canadian Patent Office before the patent in question was issued. Such prior knowledge was conceded by the inventors as it appears on the second and third paragraphs of page 1 of the Denman patent. The fundamental question remains whether the Denman combination of intersecting foam-filled lattices was obvious.
[131]
The defendants submit in fact that the patent has produced a mere aggregation of known elements; that the alleged invention was merely a workshop improvement and the result of mechanical skill and did not constitute a patentable invention.
[132]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 1, the Federal Court of Appeal reviewed the established authorities on the subject of combination patents. They are stated as follows by Urie, J., at page 8:
"The principles of law relating to combination patents are well-known and were conveniently summarized by Thorson, P., in the following excerpt from  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  combination in claim 5 can be an invention. It is not necessary to the validity of a combination invention that its elements should be new. Indeed, all of them may be old. If the combination is the vide  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  old; Terrell on Patents, 8th Edition, pp. 78-81. It is essential to the validity of a patent for a combination invention, apart from considerations of novelty and inventive ingenuity that the combination should lead to a unitary result rather than a succession of results, that such result should be different from the sum of the results of the elements and that it should be simple and not complex. The elements may interact with one another provided they combine for a unitary and simple result that is not attributable to any of the elements but flows from the combination itself and would not be possible without it.
1. (1908), 25 R.P.C. 631, at 656, 657
2. (1934), S.C.R. 94, at 104'
"Rinfret, C.J.C., in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  co-acting parts achieving a combined result or, as was said in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at (what may be called) a simple and not a complex result". As was found in the Baldwin case, supra, that satisfies the definition of a combination for the purposes of the patent law.
3. (1908), 25 R.P.C. 631, at 657'"
[133]
In the case at bar, the evidence shows that despite the extensive research and development initiative undertaken following the United States Government Funding Programs in 1966, the combination of intersecting foamfilled lattices was not obvious to those skilled in the art. None of the patents or of the publications invoked as prior art by the defendants suggest the Denman combination. Owen Denman explained that each of the materials involved individually had a relatively constant resistance force characteristic relative to compression stroke, instead of the increasing resistance force that was sought. It was completely unexpected that the two in the combination claimed would manifest an increasing resistant force, which turned out to be the case. Furthermore, the plaintiff invested some four manyears of work and spent an estimated $1,000,000 on the research and development project that lead to the energy absorbing cartridge described in the Denman patent. This is further proof that the development was far from obvious.
[134]
I must recall that the perspective of the notional persons skilled in the art must be from the time period just prior to the invention looking forward. Ex post facto analysis of an invention is not sound.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , Noel, J., stated at pages 218 and 219:
"Here again, I might point out, the defendants are not dealing with the invention of the patent in suit in a realistic manner by dissecting the invention as they have done in the prior art charts. Indeed, as I have already held, we are dealing here with an invention that lies in the combination. The combination here is in relation to a number of elements, the shank portion and the toe portion, and the bavel area or cylindrical surface which enables the unit to achieve ease of maintenance. Now, although it is permissible to mosaic in the matter of inventiveness, great caution should be used in dealing with a combination.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 40, Greene, L.J., stated:
'The dissection of a combination into its constituent elements and the examination of each element in order to see whether its use was obvious or not is, in our view, a method which ought to be applied with great caution since it tends to obscure the fact that the invention claimed is the combination. Moreover, this method also tends to obscure the facts that the conception of the combination is what normally governs and precedes the selection of the elements of which it is composed and that the obviousness or otherwise of each act of selection must in general be examined in the light of this consideration. The real and ultimate question is: Is the combination obvious or not?'
"It, therefore, is not permissible to characterize the invention as a series of parts because the invention lies in the fact that they were put together and I might even add here that the invention may well reside here in the very idea itself of arranging a tooth such as that of the patent in suit in a manner where its configuration will allow not only easiness of filing and maintenance, but will also give excellent cutting.
" <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 347, referred to in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , Stone, J., stated at page 188:
"In dealing with a question of obviousness, care must always be taken to guard against dangers inherent in hindsight analysis. The thought underlying the expression that one is 'the wiser after the fact' (even as regards inventions) was captured as early as 1667 in these poetic words:
'The invention all admir'd, and each, how he To be the inventer miss'd; so easie it seemed Once found, which yet unfound most would have thought Impossible.' (John Milton, Paradise Lost, Book VI, lines 498-501.)
"In patent law, that notion was put in legal terms by Lord Russel of Killowen, in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (H.L.) at page 142 where he said: 'Nothing is easier than to say, after the event, that the thing was obvious and involved no invention'. The same view was recently echoed by my colleague Mr. Justice Hugessen in the Beloit case at page 296 (sic)."
[136]
Finally,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (supra), Hugessen, J., stated, at page 295:
"While the evidence of experts is, in my view, properly admissible even on an 'ultimate issue' question such as obviousness, it seems to me that it must be treated with extreme care.
"Every invention is obvious after it has been made, and to no one more so than an expert in the field. Where the expert has been hired for the purpose of testifying, his infallible hindsight is even more suspect. It is so easy, once the teaching of a patent is known, to say, 'I could have done that'; before the assertion can be given any weight, one must have a satisfactory answer to the question, 'Why didn't you?'"
[137]
Comparing the claimed invention and the relevant body of prior art, I find that the degree of difference is significant enough to qualify as an inventive step. I am also of the opinion that the invention at issue was a combination of known elements that offered a new result flowing from their interaction and that such combination was inventive.
[138]
Furthermore, commercial success is a secondary but relevant consideration in the approach to the inventive step requirement. ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , per Gibson, J., at pages 21 and 36;  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  present case. Mr. Denman showed that the invented cartridge was readily accepted by the Highway Safety Community and that shortly after its introduction in the market place, it very quickly replaced the plaintiff's other compression-type enerby absorbers. Mr. Denman produced a chart illustrating the rapid growth of the Hex-Foam cartridge from zero percent of sales of compression-type energy absorbers by the plaintiff in January of 1981 to 100 percent of such sales by July of 1982.
[139]
In view of the evidence in this case of a problem and a solution to it (the necessity to accommodate an 1,800 lb. vehicle collision without weakening the structure and impairing a redirective capability of a crash cushion, and the discovery of a lighter weight substitute for the compression-type energy absorbing material to be mounted in the bays of the crash cushion), and as there was no evidence of any unusual or excessive advertising, the commercial success is strong evidence of invention. As stated in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  commercial success of an invention may be a material factor in determining whether the new result produced by it was obvious or involved inventive ingenuity. Commercial success by itself, without the solution of a problem, is not sufficient to establish subject matter: vide  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 413. But where there is evidence of a problem and a solution of it then commercial success is strong evidence of invention."
[140]
Finally, with respect more specifically to Claims 11, 12 and 13 of the Denman patent, the parties acknowledged at trial that those claims cannot define something obvious unless Claim 1 defines something obvious, which I just found is the case.
[141]
I must therefore conclude that the defendants have failed in their attack on the validity of the patents in suit and that therefore the defendants' counterclaim must be dismissed.
II. Copyright Infringement
[142]
The evidence shows that the plaintiff is the owner of the copyright in technical drawings of roadway barriers of the type covered by Canadian Patent 940,751, which drawings are the subject of numerous Certificates of Registration of Copyright bearing Registration Nos. 384,404 to 384,428 inclusive. The drawings are also photolithographically reproduced in one or more of the following booklets published by the plaintiff and entitled: "G-R-E-A-T System Design Manual" (c 1987); "G-R-E-A-T System Design Manual" (c 1985); "G-R-E-A-T System Design Manual Addendum - Hexfoam" (c 1981); "G-R-E-A-T System Design Manual" (c 1980); "Hex-Foam G-R-E-A-T System Installation Manual" (c 1985); and "Hex-Foam G-R-E-A-T System Installation Manual" (c 1982).
[143]
By virtue of s. 13(2) of the Copyright Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-42, the plaintiff is also the owner of the copyright in the lithographic plates from which the said technical drawings in the said manuals were reproduced.
[144]
In fact, the ownership of copyright by the plaintiff was not disputed at trial.
[145]
The evidence shows that the defendant Safety Impact Road Inc. published and distributed in Canada an English and a French language version of a manual entitled respectively Cell-foam Absorbing System and Système Amortisseur Cell-foam, which describes the roadway barriers or crash cushions that I have just found have infringed and are infringing the plaintiff's patents also in suit. In its manual, the defendant Safety Impact Road Inc. has made certain unauthorized reproductions of the plaintiff's registered technical drawings. As a matter of fact, virtually each drawing in that defendant's manual has a source in the plaintiff's manuals in which the latter's drawings are photolithographically reproduced. Since the plaintiff's drawings are so reproduced in some 20 pages of the 32 pages of System Impact Road's manual, it can be said that the plaintiff's manuals are substantially taken by that defendant.
[146]
Copyright is infringed by making copies or reproductions of works in which copyright exists. The case-law has intepreted the statutory provisions of the Act in such a way that "copying" is an essential ingredient of infringement. Copying comprises the taking of the whole or substantial part of the work (see  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at pp. 90-94; and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 153).
[147]
Where there is substantial similarity between the works and it is established that the author of the copy had access to the original work, as it is the case here, the court may infer that one work is a copy of another work (see  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (H.L.) 619). The existence in two works of common errors and arbitrary details further supports a presumption of copying (see  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at 145-150;  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  to the plaintiff's design and installation manuals, which were given to them when the defendant Y. Boissonneault et Fils bought a complete Hex-Foam "G-R-E-A-T System" crash cushion in 1986. Moreover, the existence of common arbitrary details is obvious, here, as it appears, for example, from the following comparisons:
(a) at page 18 of the 1987 G-R-E-A-T Manual and page 20 of Safety Impact Road's manual, the dots on the concrete block of the lower illustration are virtually identical;
(b) at page 6 of the 1985 G-R-E-A-T Manual and page 8 of Safety Impact Road's manual, the dotted line at the bottom of the lower illustration is at the same time identical and unnecessary.
[149]
At trial, the real issue was not so much whether the defendants had copied the plaintiff's registered drawings as whether the owner of a copyright for the design of something covered by a patent can thereby obtain longer protection than that accorded to the patent itself. In that respect, counsel for the defendants merely relied on the judgment in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  on November 25, 1985.
[150]
In 1988, however, s. 64 of the Copyright Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-42, was repealed by s. 11 of the amending statute R.S.C. c. 10 (4th Supp.), and the following substitute therefor:
"64(1) In this section and section 64.1,
'article' means anything that is made by hand, took or machine;
'design' means features of shape, configuration, pattern or ornament and any combination of those features that, in a finished article, appeal to and are judged solely by the eye;
'useful article' means an article that has a utilitarian function and includes a model of any such article;
'utilitarian function', in respect of an article, means a function other than merely serving as a substrate or carrier for artistic or literary matter.
"64(2) Where copyright subsists in a design applied to a useful article or in an artistic work from which the design is derived and, by or under the authority of any person who owns the copyright in Canada or who owns the copyright elsewhere,
(a) the article is reproduced in a quantity of more than fifty, or
(b) where the article is a plate, engraving or cast, the article is used for producing more than fifty useful articles,
it shall not thereafter be an infringement of the copyright or the moral rights for anyone
(c) to reproduce the design of the article or a design not differing substantially from the design of the article by
(i) making the article, or
(ii) making a drawing or other reproduction in any material form of the article, or
(d) to do with an article, drawing or reproduction that is made as described in paragraph (c) anything that the owner of the copyright has the sole right to do with the design or artistic work in which the copyright subsists.
"64(3) Subsection (2) does not apply in respect of the copyright or the moral rights in an artistic work insofar as the work is used as or for
(a) A graphic or photographic representation that is applied to the face of an article;
(b) a trademark or a representation thereof or a label;
(c) material that has a woven or knitted pattern or that is suitable for piece goods or surface coverings or for making wearing apparel;
(d) an architectural work of art that is a building or a model of a building;
(e) a representation of a real or fictitious being, event or place that is applied to an article as a feature of shape, configuration, pattern or ornament;
(f) articles that are sold as a set, unless more than fifty sets are made; or
(g) such other work or article as may be prescribed by regulation of the Governor-in-Council.
"64(4) Subsections (2) and (3) apply only in respect of designs created after the coming into force of this subsection, and section 64 of this Act and the Industrial Design Act, as they read immediately before the coming into force of this subsection, as well as the rules made under them, continue to apply in respect of designs created before that coming into force.
"64.1(1) The following acts do not constitute an infringement of the copyright or moral rights in a work:
(a) applying to a useful article features that are dictated solely by a utilitarian function of the article;
(b) by reference solely to a useful article, making a drawing or other reproduction in any material form of any features of the article that are dictated solely by a utilitarian function of the article;
(c) doing with a useful article having only features described in paragraph (a), or with a drawing or reproduction made as described in paragraph (b), anything that the owner of the copyright has the sole right to do with the work; and
(d) using any method or principle of manufacture or construction.
"64.1(2) Nothing in subsection (1) affects the copyright or the moral rights in a record, perforated roll, cinematograph film or other contrivance by means of which a work may be mechanically reproduced, performed or delivered."
[151]
Section 26 of the same amending statute states:
"Subsection 64(1) and section 64.1 of the Copyright Act, as enacted by section 11, apply in respect of any alleged infringement of copyright occurring prior to, on or after the day on which section 11 comes into force."
[152]
It is clear, therefore, that pursuant to s. 64(4) above, ss. 64(2) and (3) do not apply in respect of the plaintiff's designs which were created before the coming into force of s. 64(4). Section 64.1, however, may apply in a case such as the present case provided the defendants can establish that their drawings were made "by reference solely to a useful article", i.e., an article that has a utilitarian function.
[153]
Now, the drawings at issue in the Safety Impact Road's manual were not at all made "by reference solely" to the plaintiff's crash cushion, but were rather copied from the plaintiff's "G-R-E-A-T System" design and installation manuals, which is clearly prohibited copyright infringement. Under such circumstances, taking into account the above amendments to the Copyright Act, the plaintiff ought not to lose copyright protection because of the existence of patents that it owns.
III. Conclusion
[154]
Consequently, considering that the personal defendant as sole officer and director of the defendant corporations personally involved himself in carrying out the infringing activities of his corporations, considering also that both corporate defendants were in fact involved, even though not always to the same extent or at the same time, judgment will be rendered against all the defendants collectively. I will declare that, as between the parties, claims 1, 2, 6, 16, 17 and 18 of Canadian Letters Patent No. 940,751 and claims 1, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12 and 13 of Canadian Letters Patent No. 1,161,866 are valid. I will further declare that claims 1, 2 and 6 of Canadian Letters Patent No. 940,751 and claims 1, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12 and 13 of Canadian Letters Patent No. 1,161,866 have been infringed by the defendants by the manufacture and the sale in Canada of roadway barriers and energy absorbers which are comprised in their "Cell-foam Absorbing System". The defendants shall be restrained from any further such infringement of Canadian Letters Patent No. 940,751 and No. 1,161,866.
[155]
The defendants shall also deliver up to the plaintiff or destroy all such infringing roadway barriers and energy absorbers in their possession, custody or control, but the operation of this part of the judgment will be suspended pending appeal pursuant to rule 341A.
[156]
I will further declare that, as between the parties, the plaintiff's copyrights in the technical drawings subject of Copyright Registration Nos. 384,404 to 384,428 inclusive, and in the plates from which the said technical drawings are reproduced, are valid and have been infringed by the defendants by the publication and the distribution in Canada of English and French language versions of a manual entitled respectively "Cell-foam Absorbing System" and "Système Amortisseur Cell-foam", which describe the above infringing roadway barriers. The defendants shall be restrained from any further such infringement of the plaintiff's copyrights in the technical drawings subject of Copyright Registrations Nos. 384,404 to 384,428 inclusive and in the plates from which the said technical drawings are reproduced.
[157]
The defendants shall also deliver up to the plaintiff or destroy all such infringing manuals in their possession, custody or control, as well as the plates from which the said manuals are reproduced, but the operation of this part of the judgment will be suspended pending appeal pursuant to rule 341A.
[158]
As for the reference under rule 500 et seq., it will be a reference to determine the plaintiff's damages or the defendants' profits (as the plaintiff elects) arising from the above infringement of the patents and copyrights by the defendants. The defendants shall pay such damages or profits, together with interest at a rate to be determined by the Referee from the date of filing the statement of claim with this court's Registry.
[159]
The counterclaim will be dismissed and, finally, the plaintiff shall recover from the defendants, after taxation, its costs of this action.
Action allowed;
Counterclaim dismissed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/nmg
Footnotes
1. Such restraining and secondary cables are also specified in claim 19, which is not in issue here.
[End of document]