[1]
Teitlebaum, J.
: This is an application for the issuance of a writ of certiorari quashing the decision made on June 17, 1991 by the Immigration Section of the Canadian Consulate General in Seattle, U.S.A. which rejected the application of the applicant for an immigrant visa; and for a writ of mandamus compelling the Minister of Employment and Immigration and the Secretary of State for External Affairs to reconsider the applicant's application for an immigrant visa in accordance with the statutory direction.
[2]
As stated by the applicant, the grounds of the application are:
"... that the Visa Officer's decision denying the application of the applicant for an immigrant visa was made in a patently unreasonable and arbitrary manner in excess of, and without, jurisdiction and is in breach of a duty of fairness and in disregard of the requirements imposed by statute."
[3]
There appears to be no dispute as to the facts. The facts are, as stated by the applicant in his affidavit, and outlined in his motion record:
"1. The applicant Shui-Man Lam, is a resident of Hong Kong. He is married to Fung-Ping Yuen. They have no children.
"2. The applicant is currently the general manager and partner in a Hong Kong company called South Asia Trading Company which is in the business of importing and distributing fish purchased from China.
"3. The applicant's duties and responsibilities in respect of his position with South Asia Trading Company are to oversee the company's day-to-day operations, ensure the effective distribution and sales of the product and ensure that the daily financial obligations of the company are met.
"4. Prior to his involvement with the South Asia Trading Company, the applicant was a partner and general manager of Yau Fai Trading Co. from March 1988 until September 19, 1990. His duties and responsibilities in that position were similar to those of his position with South Asia Trading Company.
"5. Prior to his involvement with Yau Fai Trading Co., the applicant was employed for six years as a construction superintendent for Po Kee Works Co. Ltd. in Hong Kong. His duties in that position included general construction, the supervision of staff and tradesman and inventory control." (See affidavit of Lam-Chow Chui under Tab 4 of applicant's Motion Record)
"6. The applicant's net worth is currently approximately $201,200 Cdn.
"7. The applicant visited Canada in August of 1990 to attend a business seminar in Vancouver, British Columbia. He has a sister, Joan Lai, who is a permanent resident of Canada and resides in Coquitlam, British Columbia.
"8. In December 1990, the applicant applied to the Canadian Consulate General in Seattle, Washington for permanent residence in Canada." (Exhibit "A" to applicant's affidavit)
"9. It was the applicant's expressed intention in applying for permanent residence in Canada that he would start a construction business in the town of Squamish, British Columbia. Prior to making the application, the applicant investigated the possibilities of establishing such a business in Squamish and resolved that such a business would likely be a success given his experience in the construction industry and the business of possibilities in Squamish that the applicant had investigated during his 1990 visit to Squamish.
"10. In support of the applicant's application, the applicant had financial statements prepared for his proposed business which set out a two-year projection for the revenues and expenses of the company." (part of Exhibit "A")
"11. By a letter dated June 17, 1991, the Canadian Consulate General rejected the applicant's application for permanent residence without ever affording him an interview. The reasons for the applicant's rejection as set out in the said letter were as follows:
(a) Lack of English language skills;
(b) No business experience as a self-employed individual;
(c) No evidence of qualifications or experience in the construction industry in a 'North American milieu';
(d) Lack of evidence to support his statement that he was employed as construction superintendent for six years;
(e) The construction industry in British Columbia is currently suffering an economic downturn and thus no economic benefit would accrue to Canada from the establishment of a construction in the area; and
(f) His personal liquid financial assets are inadequate for the successful establishment of a business in Canada ..." (Exhibit "B" to applicant's affidavit)
[4]
I believe it necessary to reproduce the letter forwarded to the applicant on June 17, 1991 in relation to his application for an immigrant visa: (Exhibit "B" applicant's affidavit)
"17 June 1991
Mr. Shui-Man Lam
Flat 1, 21/F, Block B
New Town Mansion
Tuen Mun, New Territories
Hong Kong
Dear Mr. Lam,
I write in reference to your application for permanent residence status in Canada as a self-employed applicant.
The Canada
Immigration Act
and
Regulations
define a self-employed immigrant as an individual who intends and has the ability to establish or purchase a business in Canada that will create an employment opportunity for himself and will make a significant contribution to the economy or the cultural or artistic life of Canada. In evaluating a self-employed application, we carefully review the individuals previous history of self-employment and the prospects for their self-employment in Canada according to the above definition. In addition to these factors, the applicant must have the resources to successfully establish themselves and their family in Canada and must be of good health and good character.
After a full and careful consideration of all factors in your application, I must, with regret, conclude that you are unable to meet the requirements to qualify as a self-employed immigrant to Canada.
Specifically, your lack of English language skills makes it unlikely that you could successfully establish and operate a self-employed business venture in Canada. You have no business experience as a self-employed individual in the past. Although you intended to establish a business 'engaged in construction and general contracting' there is no evidence as to your qualifications or experience in the construction industry in a North American milieu. We note that your formal training was as a jewelry apprentice and that you claimed six years of experience as a construction superintendent is unsupported. The construction industry in the area of British Columbia in which you proposed to establish is currently suffering an economic downturn, due to the prolonged recession in Canada. No significant economic benefit would accrue to Canada from the establishment of any new enterprise in this area. Finally, your personal liquid financial assets are inadequate for the establishment of any business enterprise in Canada and the successful establishment of you and your spouse.
I must, therefore, refuse your application at this time. Thank you for your interest in Canada. If, at some future date, you wish to again be considered for immigration to Canada it will be necessary for you to submit a complete new application and processing fee. We would strongly suggest that any such application be submitted to the Canadian mission responsible for your country of permanent residence.
Sincerely,
Nigel H. Thomson
Consul"
[5]
The respondent filed the affidavit of Nigel H. Thomson, the visa officer who refused the applicant's application. I believe it is necessary to reproduce part of Mr. Thomson's affidavit as it outlines the procedure Mr. Thomson followed in deciding to refuse the applicant's application:
"3. ... on 28 January 1991 an application for permanent residence in Canada (IMM8) for the applicant and his wife, along with supporting documentation, was received by the Immigration Section of the Canadian Consulate General ...
"4. Mr. Lam requested that his application be assessed in the self-employed category for immigration, with the expressed intention to invest approximately 85,000 Canadian dollars in a new enterprise at Squamish, B.C. The business was to be engaged in construction and general contracting. The primary market Mr. Lam intended to pursue was in the Squamish and Whistler area.
"5. Pursuant to paragraph 2(1) of the
Immigration Regulations
, in order to meet the definition of self-employed person, the category in which he was applying, Mr. Lam was required to demonstrate that he had the ability to establish or purchase a business in Canada that would create an employment opportunity for himself and would make a significant contribution to the economy or the cultural or artistic life of Canada. In accordance with the regulation 8(1)(b), I assessed Mr. Lam's application on the basis of each of the factors listed in column I of Schedule I, other than the factor set out in item 5 thereof which was not relevant to this application.
"6. Because Mr. Lam proposed to establish a business engaged in construction and general contracting, I assigned the occupation of Foreman, Construction. He was assessed according to the requirements for this occupation as specified in the Canadian Classification and Dictionary of Occupations (CCDO). The CCDO, inter alia, provides an analysis of occupations and lists the Specific Vocational Preparation (SVP) (measured by the amount of time needed to acquire the information, techniques, and skills for average work performance in a specific occupation). The CCDO code for Foreman, Construction was 8780-114. (Exhibit C refers.) The occupational demand factor for this construction occupations, including Foreman, Construction, was zero. The appropriate pages of the Occupational Demand List are attached as Exhibit D (note that an
absence
of an entry on this list indicates that the CCDO occupation is to be accorded zero demand factor). The SVP assigned for the occupation was eight which indicated that over four years up to including 10 years of training were required. (Exhibit E refers.) Pursuant to Schedule 1 to the Immigration Regulations, such training equated to 13 units of assessment. I assigned three units of assessment for English (one point each for speaking, writing and reading English 'with difficulty'). Therefore, Mr. Lam received the following units of assessment:
Age	10
Occupational Factor	0
Specific Vocational
Preparation	13
Experience	4
Arranged Employment	N/A
Demographic Factor	5
Education	9
English	3
French	0
"7. Further, in accordance with regulation 8(4), I reviewed Mr. Lam's application to determine if he would be able to become successfully established in his occupation or business in Canada as a self-employed person. In particular, I considered the following specific factors as presented in Mr. Lam's application:
- Mr. Lam indicated that he had limited ability in the English language.
- Mr. Lam did not provide verifiable evidence that he had experience as a self-employed individual in the construction or related fields.
- His application did not contain verifiable evidence to support his claim of six years of work experience as a Construction Superintendent in Hong Kong.
- Mr. Lam indicated on his application that he had apprenticed as a jeweller from 1978 to 1981 but did not indicate any formal apprenticeship, schooling, training or certification in Hong Kong in any construction trade or related occupation.
- I noted that the General and Designated Occupation List accorded all construction occupations zero units of occupational demand.
"8. I also considered the money which was available to Mr. Lam. Mr. Lam indicated a total personal net worth of 162,172 Canadian dollars. I noted that much of this sum depended on the successful liquidation of his property in Hong Kong, his principle asset. Based upon my experience in evaluating applications for self-employed persons, I came to the conclusion that this amount of money would be inadequate to begin a business in Squamish, British Columbia and to establish a family of two persons.
"9. Considering all of these factors, I determined that Mr. Lam could not become successfully established in his business or intended occupation in Canada. I determined that Mr. Lam did not meet the definition of self-employed person and I therefore did not accord Mr. Lam the 30 units of assessment for self-employment described in regulation R(8)(4). Mr. Lam therefore received a total of 44 units of assessment.
"10. Given this result, Mr. Lam could not have met the minimum requirement of 70 units of assessment to qualify as a self-employed immigrant as required by regulation 9(1)(b)(i) even if he had been accorded the maximum 10 units of assessment for Personal Suitability after an interview. I therefore concluded that no purpose would be served in calling Mr. Lam for a personal interview and that Mr. Lam's application was refused.
"11. Having considered all aspects of the application, a letter informing Mr. Lam that the application had been refused was sent on 17 June 1991 ..."
[6]
As can be seen in paragraph 10 of Mr. Thomson's affidavit, Mr. Thomson decided that due to the fact that the applicant could not have met the minimum requirement of 70 units of assessment to qualify as a self-employed immigrant as required by s. 9(1)(b)(i) even if he had been accorded the maximum 10 units of assessment for Personal Suitability after an interview, Mr. Thomson concluded not to grant the applicant an interview as no purpose would be served and this, notwithstanding the wording of Schedule I, Factor 9:
"
Factors Units
Criteria
Max.
9. Personal Suitability
Units of assessment shall be awarded
on the basis of an interview
with the person to reflect the personal suitability of the person and his dependants to become successfully established in Canada based on the person's adaptability, motivation, initiative, resourcefulness and other similar qualities." (Emphasis added)
10
[7]
I take this to mean that after an interview with the prospective immigrant, the officer doing the assessment must award up to 10 units depending on his finding as to the personal suitability of the prospective immigrant to become successfully established based on the person's qualities. In the event that 10 units, the maximum, are awarded, I take this to mean that in the opinion of the interviewing officer, he or she is satisfied that the prospective immigrant has the personal suitability to become successfully established in Canada based on the prospective immigrant's adaptability, motivation, initiative, resourcefulness and other similar characteristics.
[8]
It is to be noted that Mr. Thomson, in paragraph 10 of his affidavit states that even if he had awarded the applicant the maximum 10 units he could not have qualified as a self-employed immigrant.
Issue
[9]
The issue in this case is to determine whether a person who makes application for a visa as a self-employed immigrant must be interviewed in order for the visa officer to properly assess the Factor 9 issue of "Personal Suitability" found in Schedule I to the
Regulations
. The question being, does the visa officer have the discretion to grant or not grant an interview?
Applicant's Submission
[10]
The applicant submits that the regulatory scheme pursuant to which Parliament mandates the basis for immigration decisions is, for the present application, set out in s. 9(2) of the
Immigration Act
1976-1977, c. 52, s. 1, in ss. 8(2), 8(4) and 11(3) of the
Regulations
and in Schedule I of the
Regulations
.
[11]
Counsel for the applicant submits that the applicant was not granted an interview. The visa officer now states that he had determined that Mr. Lam would not qualify in any event and on that basis, counsel submits, the visa officer took away the applicant's right to an interview. Counsel submits that the
Immigration Act
provides every person applying for a visa shall be assessed by visa officer and the
Regulations
provide that a visa officer shall award units of assessment in accordance with Schedule I. Schedule I provides that, with respect to personal suitability, units of assessments shall be awarded on the basis of an interview and, in this case, the visa officer chose not to grant an interview. Counsel now states the visa officer's decision must now be quashed for his failure to grant the applicant an interview and that he must be compelled to grant the applicant an interview. Counsel submits that a visa officer does not make the rules, he is obligated to apply the rules. He cannot, counsel submits, decide not to grant the interview which Schedule I to the
Regulations
concerning Factor 9 "Personal Suitability" states must be granted to an applicant.
[12]
In addition to the above submission, counsel states that the visa officer came to broad sweeping conclusions without disclosing the basis for his conclusions. Counsel submits, the visa officer found that the fact of difficulty with the English language would be a serious impediment to the applicant in the construction industry.
[13]
Counsel submits that the
Immigration Act
is designed to promote immigration and it should be given an interpretation appropriate to that goal. Counsel further submits that a visa officer should conduct himself fairly. He cannot conduct himself capriciously. The basis of the visa officer's ability to decide on all of the matters in issue would have been assisted had Mr. Lam been granted an interview.
Respondent's Submission
[14]
Respondent submits that the visa officer did make a proper interpretation under the statute and
Regulations
as to whether the applicant was a self-employed person and that the visa officer directed his mind to the proper question and that his conclusion was not patently unreasonable.
[15]
Counsel further submits that the assessment process is a two stage process and that it is only after an applicant has passed the first stage, an assessment of the application, that an interview should be granted. That is, if the visa officer decides after assessing the application that an interview is warranted, he or she would then grant an interview. Counsel submits that in the case before me there was no purpose to grant the applicant an interview as even if he were granted the 10 units for "Personal Suitability", the applicant could not have achieved the required 70 units.
[16]
Furthermore, counsel submits that the word "shall" found in Factor 9 of Schedule I is not before the word "interview" but is before the words "be awarded". This, counsel submits, indicates that the visa officer "shall" award units not "shall" interview.
[17]
I will state immediately that I cannot, with all due respect to counsel, accept this line of reasoning. If units "shall be awarded" these units cannot be awarded unless it is "on the basis of an interview" with the person.
Discussion
[18]
Viewing the facts of this case and in particular the manner in which the visa officer came to the conclusion that the applicant is unable to meet the requirements to qualify as a self-employed immigrant to Canada, I believe it necessary to repeat what the Associate Chief Justice of the Federal Court of Canada states as to Parliament's intention in enacting the
Immigration Act
. In the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R.(2d) 48 (F.C.T.D.), at p. 51, Mr. Justice Jerome states:
"It is important to bear in mind that Parliament's intention in enacting the
Immigration Act
is to define Canada's immigration policy both to Canadians and to those who wish to come here from abroad. Such a policy cannot exist without complex regulations, a good many of which appear to be restrictive in nature,
but the policy should always be interpreted in positive terms
. The purpose of the statute is to permit immigration, not prevent it, and it is the corresponding obligation of immigration officers to provide a thorough and fair assessment in compliance with the terms and the spirit of the legislation.
" (Emphasis added)
This statement as to Parliament's intention in enacting the
Immigration Act
was repeated by the Associate Chief Justice in the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R.(2d) 38 (F.C.T.D.), at pp. 40 and 41.
[19]
Both the
Yang
case (A-169-89) and the
Ho
case (A-187-89) were appealed to the Federal Court of Appeal. On May 22, 1990, Mr. Justice Mahoney denied the appeals for reasons not totally related to the facts in the case before me.
[20]
With the above principle as the base, it becomes incumbent to examine what occurred in this case.
[21]
The applicant filed an application for a visa as a self-employed immigrant. Section 9(2) of the
Immigration Act
states:
"Every person who makes an application for a visa shall be assessed by a visa officer for the purpose of determining whether the person appears to be a person who may be granted landing or entry, as the case may be."
[22]
The visa officer assessed the applicant's application and concluded that he could award the applicant 47 units. Mr. Thomson also states he reviewed the application with a view if the applicant would be able to become successfully established pursuant to s. 8(4) and concluded he could not successfully establish himself for the reasons given in his affidavit. This conclusion was reached by the visa officer without an interview.
[23]
Section 8 of the
Regulations
states:
"8(1) For the purpose of determining whether an immigrant and his dependants, other than a member of the family class or a Convention refugee seeking resettlement, will be able to become successfully established in Canada, a visa officer shall assess that immigrant or, at the option of the immigrant, the spouse of that immigrant,
(a) in the case of an immigrant, other than an immigrant described in paragraph (b), (c) or (e), on the basis of each of the factors listed in column I of Schedule I;
(b) in the case of an immigrant who intends to be a self-employed person in Canada, on the basis of each of the factors listed in column I of Schedule I, other than the factor set out in item 5 thereof;
(c) in the case of an entrepreneur, an investor or a provincial nominee, on the basis of each of the factors listed in column I of Schedule I, other than the factors set out in items 4 and 5 thereof;
(d) Revoked SOR/85-1038, s. 3(2);
(e) in the case of a retired person, on the basis of
(i) the location in which the immigrant intends to reside,
(ii) the presence of friends or relatives of the immigrant in the locality in which he intends to reside, and
(iii) the potential of the immigrant for adjusting to life in Canada, his motivation and whether he has sufficient financial resources to support himself and his accompanying dependants without receiving any financial social benefits that may be paid to him by any department or agency of a municipal, provincial or federal government in Canada.
"(2) A visa officer shall award to an immigrant who is assessed on the basis of factors listed in column I of Schedule I the appropriate number of units of assessment for each factor in accordance with the criteria set out in column II thereof opposite that factor, but he shall not award for any factor more units of assessment than the maximum number set out in column III thereof opposite that factor.
"(3) Revoked: SOR/85-1038, s. 3(3).
"(4) Where a visa officer assesses an immigrant who intends to be a self-employed person in Canada, he shall, in addition to any other units of assessment awarded to that immigrant, award 30 units of assessment to the immigrant if, in the opinion of the visa officer, the immigrant will be able to become sucessfully [sic] established in his occupation or business in Canada."
[24]
As I have stated, the visa officer in his affidavit states that even if he had allowed 10 units for Factor 9 of Schedule I to the
Regulations
, Mr. Lam would not have attained the 70 units required. I have also stated that by allowing 10 units for Factor 9, it is implied that the applicant is an individual with all of the qualities listed in Factor 9, that is, he is a person who can adapt, is a person who is motivated, is a person who has initiative, is a person who is resourceful and is a person who has other similar qualities. Section 8(4) allows the visa officer to assess an immigrant who intends to be a self-employed person in Canada, in addition to the other units awarded an additional 30 units of assessment may be awarded if, in the opinion of the visa officer the immigrant will become successfully established in his occupation or business.
[25]
I am satisfied that by not having granted the applicant an interview, the visa officer was not in a position to determine whether or not he would have allowed the 30 units of assessment in s. 8(4) of the
Regulations
in that, it is assumed that this applicant has all of the qualities mentioned in Factor 9 of Schedule I to the
Regulations
.
[26]
In addition, s. 11(3) of the
Immigration Regulations
permits a visa officer to issue a visa even if the applicant is not awarded the necessary number of units under certain conditions:
"11(3) A visa officer may
(a) issue an immigrant visa to an immigrant who is not awarded the number of units of assessment required by s. 9 or 10 or who does not meet the requirements of subsection (1) or (2), or
(b) refuse to issue an immigrant visa to an immigrant who is awarded the number of units of assessment required by s. 9 or 10,
if, in his opinion, there are good reasons why the number of units of assessment awarded do not reflect the chances of the particular immigrant and his dependants of becoming successfully established in Canada and those reasons have been submitted in writing to, and approved by, a senior immigration officer."
[27]
Taking the facts in this case as they are, that is, that the present applicant has all of the qualities mentioned in Factor 9 of Schedule I to the
Regulations
, how can the visa officer form a valid opinion under s. 11(3) of the
Regulations
without an interview? I believe that he could not do so.
[28]
I am satisfied that the visa officer should have granted the applicant an interview but does this mean to say that an interview must be granted according to the
Regulations
and to the
Act
.
[29]
I am satisfied that the visa officer erred in deciding not to grant the applicant an interview pursuant to Factor 9 of Schedule I to the
Regulations
as I believe the visa officer has no discretion but to grant the interview mentioned in Factor 9. It is incumbent upon the visa officer to follow the procedure set out in the statute.
[30]
In the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.E.L.R.(N.S.) 287 (F.C.T.D.), the court held that by not applying the provisions of the
Environmental Assessment and Review Guidelines Order
(
EARP Guidelines Order
), the Minister failed to comply with his statutory duty. So here, the visa officer by not following the procedure in Factor 9, failed in his statutory duty. The use of the word "shall" as used in Factor 9 clearly indicates an obligation to hold an interview to assess the applicant's "qualities" and thus enable the visa officer to come to a valid opinion pursuant to s. 8(4) of the
Regulations
or s. 11(3) of the
Regulations
.
[31]
In the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Applications for permanent residence under the self-employed provisions of the
Immigration Act
and
Regulations
involve a two-stage assessment process. The first phase of the assessment is a paper screening process in which immigration officials evaluate documents submitted by applicants and decide if the application process should be continued. If the applicant passes this phase, he is invited to an interview with a visa officer."
[32]
After reading the
Yang
decision I do not know on what specific basis the Associate Chief Justice concluded that an application for permanent residence under the self-employed provisions of the
Immigration Act
and
Regulations
is a "two-stage assessment process". There is no doubt that there are two stages, the filing of the application and the assessment of same pursuant to s. 9(2) of the
Immigration Act
and the second stage, if one may call it that, for the personal suitability assessment pursuant to Factor 9 of Schedule I to the
Regulations
but this, in my view, does not mean that the visa officer doing the assessment can validly complete the assessment without the interview required by Factor 9.
[33]
This is indicated by the statement of Mr. Justice Stone in the case of
Muliadi et all. v. Minister of Employment and Immigration
(1986), 66 N.R. 8; 18 Admin. L.R. 243 (F.C.A.), at p. 255. Mr. Justice Stone, in speaking for the Court of Appeal states:
"In deciding whether the appellant was accorded procedural fairness, it is necessary to examine the legislative framework in which the visa officer was required to decide the matter. Nowhere in that framework is it laid down that there be a full oral hearing before a decision is made.
In fact, not even an interview is contemplated except in the limited circumstances set forth in factor 9 under Column I of Sched. I
authorized under para. 8(1)(c) of the
Regulations
:
'Units of assessment shall be awarded on the basis of an interview with the person to reflect the personal suitability of the person and his dependants to become successfully established in Canada based on the person's adaptability, motivation, initiative, resourcefulness and other similar qualities.'" (Emphasis added)
[34]
I take this statement by Mr. Justice Stone to clearly indicate that for the limited circumstances set forth in Factor 9 under Column I of Schedule I, there must be accorded an applicant, in the circumstances of this case, an interview.
[35]
In addition, in that it is assumed that the applicant has all of the "qualities" mentioned in Factor 9, I believe the applicant should have had an opportunity of meeting the negative assessment of the visa officer before any final decision was taken. This is required for there to be procedural fairness.
Conclusion
[36]
I am satisfied that the visa officer does not have any discretion in deciding whether he or she will grant an interview pursuant to Factor 9 under Column I of Schedule I of the
Immigration Regulations
. The visa officer must follow the procedure as stated in the statute.
[37]
For these reasons, the decision of the visa officer Nigel H. Thomson dated June 17, 1991, is hereby quashed and I hereby order the Minister of Employment and Immigration to reconsider, by a visa officer other than Nigel H. Thomson, the applicant's application for an immigrant visa in accordance with the statutory direction. The visa officer is to consider, as part of the documentation filed with the applicant's application the affidavit of Lam-Chow Chui sworn to on September 25, 1991, and filed as part of the documents to this proceeding.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/sms
[End of document]