[1]
McNair, J.
: This is an appeal by way of action pursuant to s. 172 of the Income Tax Act from a notice of reassessment dated November 4, 1982, in respect of the plaintiff's 1981 taxation year. The reassessment was confirmed by the Minister on February 25, 1983. The plaintiff now seeks to have the assessment vacated.
[2]
The facts are not in dispute and are set out in an agreed statement of facts, filed on February 14, 1986, which reads as follows:
"1. The plaintiff is a company incorporated under the laws of the Province of Ontario, having its head office in the City of Ottawa, and carrying on business in the Regional Municipality of Ottawa-Carleton.
"2. Prior to December 28th, 1973, the plaintiff owned property bearing civic address number 113-115 Sparks Street in the City of Ottawa, Province of Ontario (hereinafter referred to as the 'Sparks property') from which property it carried on its business as a retail merchant in men's and boys' clothing and apparel.
"3. On July 20, 1973, a Notice of Intention to Expropriate pursuant to the Expropriation Act, R.S.C. 1970, c. 16 (1st Supp.) (the 'Expropriation Act') was registered under number 635288 against the plaintiff's interest in the Sparks property by the Minister of Public Works on behalf of Her Majesty The Queen in right of Canada.
"4. On December 28th, 1973, a Notice of Confirmation of Intention to Expropriate pursuant to the Expropriation Act was registered under number 645685 against the plaintiff's interest in the Sparks property. Under the provisions of the Expropriation Act, the 'interest confirmed to be expropriated becomes and is absolutely vested in the Crown', that is the Crown became legal owner of the expropriated interest of the plaintiff as of the date the Notice of Confirmation was registered. The plaintiff was informed that an offer of compensation for its interest would be forthcoming shortly.
"5. On January 30th, 1974, the Minister of Public Works gave Notice of Possession to the plaintiff, pursuant to s. 17 of the Expropriation Act, that the Crown required physical possession and use of the Sparks property on and after the 1st day of May, 1974. The plaintiff was offered the opportunity of continuing to occupy the property after May 1, 1974 on a lease basis the terms of which were to be the subject of negotiation.
"6. On February 21st, 1974, the Minister of Public Works made a conditional offer of compensation for the Sparks property pursuant to s. 14(1) of the Expropriation Act in the amount of $485,000.00. The plaintiff was informed that it could accept this amount without prejudice to its right to claim additional compensation in respect of its expropriated interest and further that such acceptance would not be conditional upon the plaintiff providing any release of its rights under the Expropriation Act.
"7. On April 11, 1974 the plaintiff served Notice that it required that the compensation payable for its interest in the Sparks property expropriated by Her Majesty the Queen be negotiated in accordance with the provisions of s. 28 of the Expropriation Act.
"8. By a registered letter dated November 4, 1974, the plaintiff was advised that the four conditions to which the February 21, 1974 offer of compensation was subject were no longer applicable.
"9. On January 27, 1975 the plaintiff accepted the Crown's offer of compensation of $485,000.00 on the understanding that the acceptance of the offer was not conditional upon the provision of any release and was made without prejudice to its right to claim additional compensation in respect of the interest expropriated from it. The solicitors for the plaintiff further advised that the plaintiff was accepting the payment without prejudice to its right to claim interest under s. 33(4) of the Expropriation Act.
"10. On February 24, 1975, the plaintiff executed a Receipt and Acknowledgement form acknowledging receipt of the amount of $485,000.00 from Her Majesty The Queen without prejudice to its right to claim additional compensation.
"11. The plaintiff and the Department of Public Works subsequently negotiated a 'lease back' whereby the plaintiff continued to occupy the Sparks property and the plaintiff commenced paying rent therefor on the 24th day of February, 1975. The rent owing for the period May 1, 1974 until February 23, 1975 was agreed between the parties to be in the amount of $37,710.30.
"12. On February 10th, 1976, the plaintiff filed a Statement of Claim in the Federal Court of Canada against Her Majesty the Queen and the Minister of Public Works with respect to the expropriation of its interest in the Sparks property and subsequent to the disposition of preliminary motions taken by Her Majesty the Queen and the Minister of Public Works, a Statement of Defence was filed on April 1, 1977.
"13. The above-captioned Federal Court Action did not proceed to trial, as the amount owing to the plaintiff as a result of the expropriation of its interest in the Sparks property was settled between the parties on the following basis:
Real Estate Market Value (ss. 24(3)(b)(i) of the
Expropriation Act
)
$510,000.00
Business Disturbance (ss. 24(3)(b)(ii) of the
Expropriation Act
)
$38,250.00
Interest at basic rate on the amount by which the settlement amount exceeded the offer (548,250 - 485,000 = 63,250) (ss. 33(3)(a) of the
Expropriation Act
$29,962.43
Interest at the basic rate on $548,250 from the date of possession May 1, 1974 (ss. 33(3) of the
Expropriation Act
)
$33,871.34
Interest at the rate of 5% per annum on $548,250 as the amount of the offer (485,000) was less than 90% $548,250 (ss. 33(3)(b) of the
Expropriation Act
)
$144,172.43
Total
$756,256.20
"14. On April 30, 1980 the plaintiff received the amount of $233,545.90 calculated as follows:
Total amount owing to plaintiff
$756,256.20
Less: Amount paid
485,000.00
Less: Rent owed by plaintiff (see para. 11 hereof)
$37,710.30
Final amount owing
$233,545.90
The plaintiff further subsequently received its reasonable costs of appraisal and legal fees pursuant to the Expropriation Act.
"15. On April 29, 1980 the plaintiff executed a Deed in favour of Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada whereby the plaintiff, inter alia,
(i) released all its claims upon the Sparks property to Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada,
(ii) acknowledged that the Sparks property had been duly expropriated by Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada.
(iii) released Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada from all claims and demands for severance, depreciation, injurious affection, compensation, damages or other matter of thing arising out of or connected with the expropriation.
The Deed was registered in the Land Registry Division of Ottawa-Carleton on July 16, 1980.
"16. In reporting its income for tax purposes for its 1981 taxation year the plaintiff, with respect to the expropriation of the Sparks property,
(i) included the amounts of $29,962.43 and $33,871.34 being the amounts received by it pursuant to ss. 33(3)(a) and 33(3) of the Expropriation Act respectively as interest,
(ii) included the amount of $31,625 as a taxable capital gain calculated as follows:
Proceeds of disposition
$510,000
-
Less: Adjusted cost base
$
485,000
-
Capital gain
-
$25,000
Compensation for business disturbance
$38,250
-
Less: Adjusted cost base
-
Capital gain
$38,250
-
Total capital gain
$63,250
-
TAXABLE CAPITAL GAIN
$31,625
-
(iii) did not include in the computation of it's [sic] taxable capital gain or in the computation of it's [sic] income at all the amount of $144,172.43 received by it pursuant to the provisions of ss. 33(3)(b) of the Expropriation Act.
"17. The Minister of National Revenue reassessed the plaintiff for its 1981 taxation year Notice of which was dated November 4, 1982 so as to increase the taxable capital gains reported by the plaintiff by $72,086.00 being 50% of the sum of $144,172.43 received by the plaintiff pursuant to the provisions of ss. 33(3)(b) of the Expropriation Act.
"18. The plaintiff objected to the said reassessment, Notice of Objection of which was dated November 22, 1982 and the Minister of National Revenue by Notice dated February 25, 1983 confirmed his reassessment."
[3]
The issue in the case is whether the sum of $144,172.43 received by the plaintiff in accordance with s. 33(3)(b) of the Expropriation Act is taxable in the hands of the plaintiff. The Crown's position is that it forms part of the proceeds of disposition of the Sparks Street property or, alternatively, is interest income or income from property and is therefore taxable. The plaintiff contends that the said amount constitutes a "tax-free" receipt or windfall that does not have to be included in income for tax purposes.
[4]
Subsections 33(1), (2) and (3) of the Expropriation Act provide:
"33.(1) In this section
'basic rate' means a rate determined in the manner prescribed by any order made from time to time by the Governor in Council for the purposes of this section, being not less than the average yield, determined in the manner prescribed by such order, from Government of Canada treasury bills;
'compensation' means the amount of the compensation adjudged by the court under this Part to be payable in respect of an expropriated interest;
'date of possession' means the day upon which the Crown became entitled to take physical possession or make use of the land to which a notice of confirmation relates;
'date of the offer' means the day upon which an offer was accepted;
'offer' means an offer under section 14.
"(2) Interest is payable by the Crown at the basic rate on the compensation, from the date of possession to the date judgment is given, except where an offer has been accepted.
"(3) Where an offer has been accepted, interest is payable by the Crown from the date of the offer to the date judgment is given,
(a) at the basic rate on the amount by which the compensation exceeds the amount of the offer, and in addition
(b) at the rate of five per cent per annum on the compensation, if the amount of the offer is less than ninety per cent of the compensation;
and where an offer has been accepted after the date of possession, interest is payable at the basic rate on the compensation, from the date of possession to the date of the offer."
[5]
Section 54(c)(ii)(B) and s. 54(h)(iv) of the Income Tax Act provide:
"54(c) 'Disposition' of property. - 'disposition' of any property except as expressly otherwise provided, includes
(ii) any transaction or event by which
(B) any debt owing to a taxpayer or any other right of a taxpayer to receive an amount is settled or cancelled.
"54(h) 'Proceeds of disposition.' - 'proceeds of disposition' of property includes,
(iv) compensation for property taken under statutory authority or the sale price of property sold to a person by whom notice of an intention to take it under statutory authority was given,"
[6]
Section 12(1)(c) of the Income Tax Act reads:
"(c) Interest.--Any amount received by the taxpayer in the year or receivable by him in the year (depending upon the method regularly followed by the taxpayer in computing his profit) as, on account or in lieu of payment of, or in satisfaction of, interest;"
[7]
The plaintiff argues that the compensation paid for the Sparks Street property was $548,250 and, by virtue of s. 54(h) of the Income Tax Act, that amount is the final proceeds of disposition on which the plaintiff is required to pay tax. The amount of $144,172.43 received by the plaintiff in accordance with s. 33(3)(b) of the Expropriation Act is, according to the plaintiff, a penalty payable by the Crown in the circumstance where it has made an offer of less than ninety per cent of the amount subsequently determined to be proper compensation. Accordingly, it should not be added to the plaintiff's proceeds of disposition as defined by s. 54(h) of the Act. The plaintiff submits that the payment received pursuant to s. 33(3)(b) of the Expropriation Act is not compensation which is referable in any way to the property in question. The argument is simply that the plaintiff did not receive the payment because of any loss it suffered; rather the payment is one that is clearly earmarked as a penalty against the expropriating authority.
[8]
The plaintiff relies on a line of cases which deal with "windfall payments", so called. Generally speaking, a windfall payment is a payment of an unusual or extraordinary nature which cannot be characterized as income from a business, property or any other source because it is unrelated to the business of the taxpayer or to any exertion on his part to produce income or profit and because the payment is not of a recurrent nature or related to the productive potential of the property.
[9]
Finally, the plaintiff submits that the legislature has seen fit to exact a penalty against the expropriating authority when it fails to make a reasonable offer and that to permit such penalty to be taxable as income would thwart the legislative intention.
[10]
The defendant submits that the sum of $144,172.43 constitutes proceeds of the disposition of the Sparks Street property within the meaning of s. 54(h) of the Income Tax Act. The defendant relies on s. 54(c)(ii)(B) above referred to, which provides that a disposition of property includes any transaction or event by which any right of a taxpayer to receive an amount is settled or cancelled. Section 54(h) then defines proceeds of disposition as including compensation for property taken under statutory authority. It is the defendant's position that the plaintiff had a right to receive the amount under s. 33(3)(b) of the Expropriation Act because it received an offer of compensation which was less than ninety per cent of the amount finally agreed upon. That right was settled in return for the sum of $144,172.43 which, pursuant to s. 54(c)(ii)(B) of the Income Tax Act, constitutes a disposition of property. The defendant relies on the rules of statutory interpretation for taxation statutes and submits that in interpreting the provisions applicable to the case at bar regard must be had to the scheme and intent of the capital gains regime introduced in 1971. The defendant maintains that one must look to the reality of the situation, which is that the plaintiff's property was expropriated and in the culmination of the settlement of that expropriation the plaintiff received proceeds of disposition of $144,172.43.
[11]
The defendant further submits that while there is no dispute that the payment pursuant to s. 33(3)(b) of the Expropriation Act is penal in nature, it is nevertheless characterized in that Act as interest payable in a case where the amount of an offer of compensation turns out to be less than ninety per cent of the compensation actually found due. As such, the amount is taxable. Although the intent of the provision is to encourage the Crown to make reasonable offers of compensation and to penalize the Crown when it does not, the interest penalty is still taxable in the hands of the plaintiff.
[12]
As mentioned, the plaintiff relies heavily on a line of cases dealing with payments in the nature of windfall receipts. The leading case is  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.T.C. 6073 (F.C.A.). There a taxpayer shareholder in a Canadian company received a payment from a majority shareholder after a corporate reorganization. In order to avoid a potentially controversial issue amongst the shareholders, the majority shareholder made an offer to minority shareholders to buy their shares or make a payment on their shareholdings. The taxpayer accepted the payment offer and the Minister included the amount received in the taxpayer's income. The taxpayer appealed to the Federal Court, Trial Division, which held that the voluntary payment was received by the taxpayer as a windfall. The Crown appealed to the Federal Court of Appeal, which upheld the judgment at trial and dismissed the appeal. Le Dain, J., summarized the indica for windfall payments as follows, although taking pains to point out that while all were relevant no one by itself was conclusive:
"(a) The respondent had no enforceable claim to the payment;
(b) There was no organized effort on the part of the respondent to receive the payment;
(c) The payment was not sought after or solicited by the respondent in any manner;
(d) The payment was not expected by the respondent, either specifically or customarily;
(e) The payment had no foreseeable element of recurrence;
(f) The payor was not a customary source of income to the respondent;
(g) The payment was not in consideration for or in recognition of property, services or anything else provided or to be provided by the respondent; it was not earned by the respondent, either as a result of any activity or pursuit of gain carried on by the respondent or otherwise."
[13]
The learned judge agreed with the trial judge and concluded that the extraordinary payment in question "was in the nature of a windfall".
[14]
Counsel for the plaintiff submits that all of the above criteria, with the possible exception of the first one, apply to the case at bar. The payment was unsolicited and unanticipated. It lacked any foreseeable element of recurrence. There was no consideration for it, and it was unearned. In essence, it was unique and extraordinary and bore all the earmarks of a windfall. Counsel acknowledges that the plaintiff did have an enforceable, statutory right to the payment contrary to the first indicia but he contends nevertheless that this is not at all fatal, relying particularly on Mr. Justice Le Dain's conclusion that no single indicia is necessarily conclusive.
[15]
Another case relied on by the plaintiff is  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.C.C.). The taxpayer received compensation for the expropriation of his land. The expropriation was afterwards abandoned and the taxpayer was required to return the compensation, but without interest. The taxpayer received $10,000.00 as damages for the loss of his land for six months. On reassessment, the Minister included the $10,000.00 damages and interest earned on the compensation award in the taxpayer's taxable income. Counsel for the plaintiff pressed the argument before me that the $10,000.00 damages was a non-taxable capital receipt or a windfall. With respect, I must disagree. The issue before the court  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  was whether the $10,000.00 damages was taxable as income or on account of capital. The court found that the damages were capital and not income. The interest was held to be interest and taxable as such. Clearly, the damages were held to be capital. There was no finding that they were a windfall. In any event, the case is currently under appeal.
[16]
The plaintiff also relies on the decision in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.), wherein the issue was whether damages awarded in a court action for breach of warranty of authority were assessable as income from an adventure in the nature trade. Collier, J., held that the damages recovered were akin to a windfall and not income by reason that nothing was risked nor bought and sold and that the transaction lacked the attributes of a commercial enterprise. The Crown appealed to the Federal Court of Appeal which held that the award of damages was an income receipt: see  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.T.C. 5150. The court held that the learned trial judge had erred in holding that the transaction was not in the nature of a commercial enterprise because nothing had been risked or used nor had anything been bought or sold. On the trial judge's other conclusion that the fact that the damages awarded to the plaintiff were measured by the amount he might have been paid as "finder's fee" did not automatically make the receipt "income", Mr. Justice Mahoney had this to say at page 5155:
"... The damages for breach of warranty of authority, which he received from Benjamin Levy pursuant to a legal right, were compensation for his failure to receive the finder's fee from the Levy family shareholders. Had the respondent received that finder's fee it would have been profit from a business required by the Income Tax Act, to be included in his income in the year of its receipt. The damages for breach of warranty of authority are to be treated the same way for incomes tax purposes."
[17]
Finally, the plaintiff relies the authority of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . In this case, the respondent succeeded in an action for wrongful dismissal against the company which employed him and was awarded one year's salary as damages. The principal issue was whether a deduction should have been made therefrom for income tax. The appellant's submission rested on the premise that the respondent was not liable to income tax on the damages awarded. This was based on a judgment of the  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.T.C. 6258 (F.C.A.). The Supreme Court dismissed the company's appeal, casting doubts on the correctness of the decision  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , where severance pay of $18,000.00 was held not to be taxable because it was a settlement of a breach of contract and not a benefit under it. Pigeon, J., dealt with this point at p. 6234 (D.T.C.):
"I have grave doubt as to the validity of this reasoning. Damages payable in respect of the breach of a contract of employment are certainly due only by virtue of this contract, I fail to see how they can be said not to be paid as a benefit under the contract. They clearly have no other source. ..."
[18]
Even if the respondent were to escape income tax on the damages awarded, the court concluded that it would be illogical to allow the employer a deduction for income tax not payable.
[19]
I fail to see how this case is of any assistance to the plaintiff.
[20]
Applying these principles to the matter immediately at hand, I am left unconvinced by the plaintiff's argument that the amount of $144,172.43 paid pursuant to s. 33(3)(b) of the Expropriation Act is a windfall for three reasons. Firstly, the payment falls squarely within the capital gains regime of the Income Tax Act. Secondly, it fails to meet the essential criteria enunciated in the Cranswick case, supra. Finally, the taxation of the payment in the hands of the plaintiff does not thwart the legislative scheme of the Expropriation Act. I will elaborate briefly on these findings of fact.
[21]
In my opinion, the payment of $144,172.43 is clearly attributable to a disposition of property and the proceeds of disposition thereof within the meaning of s. 54(c)(ii)(B) and s. 54(h) of the Income Tax Act. It was paid to the plaintiff as the result of a transaction or event by which the right of the taxpayer to receive the amount was settled. The total amount received by the plaintiff in consideration for the expropriation of his interest in the Sparks Street property was $756,256.20. This was the culmination of the transaction whereby the whole amount falls within the definition of proceeds of disposition in paragraph 54(h) of the Income Tax Act inasmuch that it was compensation for property taken under statutory authority.
[22]
Nor am I persuaded by the plaintiff's argument that the payment of $144,172.43 made by the Crown pursuant to the said s. 33(3)(b) of the Act stands by itself in isolation and is not referable in any way to the Sparks Street property. The situation, as it seems to me, is just the converse. Without the expropriation of the Sparks Street property, there would have been no payment at all. The payment was partial consideration for and in recognition of the plaintiff's property interest. The plaintiff had an enforceable, statutory right to receive $144,172.43 because the Crown made an offer below ninety per cent of the amount which was eventually paid to the plaintiff as compensation for the expropriated property. The payment was part and parcel of the proceeds of disposition.
[23]
Finally, I am unable to agree with plaintiff's counsel that the taxation of the interest penalty would serve to thwart the legislative intention. He cites in support of this submission Interpretation Bulletin No. IT-104R, which sets out the Department's views on the deductibility of fines and penalties under s. 18(1)(a) of the Income Tax Act. The gist of the Bulletin is that courts have generally disallowed as a matter of public policy the deduction of fines and penalties in computing income except in those exceptional circumstances where they have been necessarily incurred in day to day business operations calculated to produce income and their deduction would not transgress public policy. Counsel for the Crown was quick to point out that the subject matter of the Bulletin has to do with fines or penalties incurred as the result of illegal acts or the carrying on of illicit businesses and that the penalty in this instance falls outside that proscription. In my view, the point is well taken. The purpose of s. 33(3)(b) of the Expropriation Act was to encourage the Crown to make reasonable offers of compensation and I fail to see how the taxation of the interest penalty in the hands of the recipient could thwart or inhibit this desirable policy objective.
[24]
The Minister reassessed the plaintiff for $72,086.00 of taxable capital gain, being one-half the interest penalty of $144,172.43. Having found that this sum represented the proceeds of disposition of property, it is unnecessary to deal definitively with the alternative defence pleas that the said sum constituted interest or income from property or a source within the meaning of the Income Tax Act.
[25]
I expressed some concern at trial that the subject matter of the appeal was the Minister's assessment and that the effect of the alternative pleas in paragraphs 8, 9 and 10 of the defence might well suggest that the Minister was appealing from his own assessment, contrary to the principle stated in Vineland Quarries and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , and other authorities. Crown counsel assured me that this was not the case and that any reassessment for interest or income from property or a source would have to be limited to $72,086.00 and not the full amount of $144,172.43. If that is so then better practice would seem to dictate that paragraphs 8, 9 and 10 of the defence should have contained some words to the effect that the amounts respectively referred to therein were "limited in any event to $72,086.00 and no more".
[26]
For the foregoing reasons, the plaintiff's appeal is dismissed with costs.
Appeal dismissed.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/sms
[End of document]