[1]
Rothstein, J.
: This is an application for judicial review of a decision of the respondent to terminate the Simon Fraser University program at William Head Institution as of June 30, 1993. An earlier application for an interlocutory injunction to prevent the termination of the program was dismissed by this court on June 28, 1993.
[2]
The applicants say that the decision to terminate the university program is made without consultation with inmates at William Head Institution contrary to s. 74 of the
Corrections and Conditional Release Act
, S.C. 1992, c. 20. Section 74 states:
"74. The Service shall provide inmates with the opportunity to contribute to decisions of the Service affecting the inmate population as a whole, or affecting a group within the inmate population, except decisions relating to security matters."
The applicants also say that the providing of university courses at William Head Institution is a mandatory obligation of the defendant pursuant to s. 76 of the
Act
and that mandamus should issue to require maintenance of university courses. Section 76 states:
"76. The Service shall provide a range of programs designed to address the needs of offenders and contribute to their successful reintegration into the community."
[3]
The respondent says that s. 74 does not require consultation with inmates prior to decisions being made, but that discussion with inmates after such decisions are made is sufficient compliance with that section. Further, the respondent says that s. 76 does not mandate the continued provision of specific programs.
[4]
The respondent's decision to terminate the university program was taken for two reasons. An analysis of various programs had been completed and it was determined that other programs should be given priority over the university program. Further, due to budgetary considerations, it was necessary to cut back some programs. The university program was one that was cut.
[5]
The decision to cut the university program was made in March, 1993. The inmates were not consulted before the decision was made. In a memo from the Deputy Warden of William Head Institution to the Warden of that same institution dated March 25, 1993, the Deputy Warden says that "as soon as it became apparent indeed that the Simon Fraser University contract would not be renewed, I undertook a series of meetings to inform/consult all affected parties". In that memo there is reference to meetings with the Inmate Committee Chairman and Secretary on March 22, 1993, and to a meeting with all inmates in the gym of the William Head Institution on March 23, 1993. Paragraph 3 of the memo states:
"3. My plan was to engage people in a reasonable discussion about restraint and cutbacks, provide them with a historical overview of previous, present, and likely future restraint. Our rationale was explained, and our commitment to Correctional Strategies was reaffirmed."
[6]
I have considered s. 74 of the
Act
. I am unable to agree with counsel for the respondent that discussions with inmates after a decision is made is sufficient compliance with s. 74. I do not see how inmates can contribute to a decision once the decision has been made. The heading immediately before s. 74 states "Inmate Input into Decisions". The necessary implication of the words in s. 74 and the accompanying heading is that the opportunity to contribute must be afforded to inmates before and not after a decision affecting them is made.
[7]
The only question is whether inmates must be consulted before all decisions affecting them, other than security decisions, are made. Counsel for the respondent argued that if all decisions were contemplated, the administration of prisons would soon become stalled. I am of the view that decisions affecting inmates contemplated by s. 74 are those that relate to the purpose of the correctional system as set out in s. 3 of the
Act
, and the principles that are to guide the Correctional Service set out in s. 4. Sections 3(b) and 4(c) of the
Act
provide:
"3. The purpose of the federal correctional system is to contribute to the maintenance of a just, peaceful and safe society by
(a) ...
(b) assisting the rehabilitation of offenders and their reintegration into the community as law-abiding citizens through the provision of programs in penitentiaries and in the community.
"4. The principles that shall guide the Service in achieving the purpose referred to in s. 3 are
(a) ...
(b) ...
(c) that the Service enhance its effectiveness and openness through the timely exchange of relevant information with other components of the criminal justice system, and through communication about its correctional policies and programs to offenders, victims and the public; ..."
Section 3(b) expressly states that the provision of programs in penitentiaries to assist in the rehabilitation of offenders is for the purpose of contributing to the maintenance of a just, peaceful and safe society. Section 4(c) provides the respondent is to communicate with offenders about such programs. The university program at William Head appears to be part of an educational program for inmates, the introduction of which was to assist in their rehabilitation. Counsel for the applicant laid great stress on the importance of inmates having the opportunity for education. From the material before me, I am satisfied that the rehabilitation of inmates is an objective that is more likely to be achieved through the use of educational programs such as the university program than without them. These are the types of programs which the
Act
, in s. 4(c), intends that the respondent communicate to offenders. I am therefore satisfied that decisions affecting educational programs for inmates in penitentiaries such as the program offered by Simon Fraser University are decisions contemplated by s. 74 of the
Act
. I would observe that the Deputy Warden himself seems to have been of the view that there should have been communication with inmates about the elimination of the university program. This suggests to me that even he thought such a decision was of the type contemplated by s. 74, albeit that he thought communication after the decision had been made was sufficient compliance with the section.
[8]
Section 74 falls under the heading in the
Act
"Living Conditions" and not under the heading "Programs for Offenders" under which ss. 76 to 78 appeal. Counsel for the respondent submitted therefore that s. 74 did not apply to decisions affecting "Programs for Offenders". However, s. 74 applies to decisions affecting the inmate population as a whole, or affecting groups within the inmate population. It is unrestricted. The narrow interpretation of s. 74 argued for by counsel of the respondent would create an inconsistency between the principles set forth in s. 4(c) and s. 74. Parliament could not have intended such inconsistency.
[9]
In failing to provide the inmates at William Head with the opportunity to contribute to the decision terminating the SFU program, the respondent failed to adhere to the requirements of s. 74 of the
Act
and therefore erred in law.
[10]
As to the position of counsel for the application that s. 76 requires maintenance of the university program, I am unable to agree. It was not contended that termination of the university program would result in a range of programs for offenders not remaining. As meritorious as the university program may be, the statute does not mandate its specific continuance. As long as a range of programs remain, the respondent is free to decide to terminate one program, such as the university program, as long as it is done in compliance with s. 74. Mandamus will not issue unless the person sought to be compelled has the legal obligation to do what is sought. There is no legal obligation on the respondent to provide or maintain specific programs, and in particular, the university program at William Head Institution. There is therefore no basis for a writ of mandamus.
[11]
Because the respondent did not comply with s. 74, the decision to terminate the Simon Fraser University program at William Head Institution is quashed. Any new decision with respect to the program shall be taken only in accordance with s. 74 of the
Act
.
[12]
The application for a writ of mandamus to compel the respondent to maintain university courses at William Head Institution is dismissed.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Angela E. McKay/blk
[End of document]