[1]
Noël, J.
[orally]: I will proceed to render a decision in the Murugiah matter, court file A-6788-92, and I will ask that these oral reasons be transcribed and, once signed by me, that they be filed as reasons for order in this matter.
[2]
This is an appeal from a decision of the Refugee Division holding that the applicant is not a Convention refugee. The claimant is a 23 year old former resident of Colombo, the capital of Sri Lanka. He maintains that he has a well-founded fear of persecution should he be returned to Sri Lanka. He argues that the Sri Lankan government views him as a member of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE), a militant Tamil organization involved in an ongoing civil war with the existing government.
[3]
The applicant points to two previous arrests, one in 1988 and one in 1991 as evidence of the treatment he is receiving in his country. The Board accepted his evidence to the effect that, on both occasions he was severely beaten by the police. The evidence reveals that, on one of these occasions, he was hung by the wrists to a ceiling fan and beaten with a bat.
[4]
The Board concluded that the applicant did not have a well-founded fear of persecution. It found that the two arrests were part of a generalized law enforcement procedure undertaken by the government to protect the citizens of Sri Lanka from further terrorist attacks. In 1988 and again in 1991, bombs had been detonated in Sri Lanka and the government's response to this was to round up as many young Tamils as possible with a view of quickly finding those members of the LTTE which may have been responsible for the bombings. In both cases, the applicant was quickly released after his arrest.
[5]
The applicant's arguments are that the Board based its decision on a perverse and capricious finding of fact and that it erred in law in finding that the word "persecution" connotes repeated acts of systematic and persistent persecution.
[6]
Dealing with the first question, the applicant alleges that the Board made a capricious or perverse finding in reaching the conclusion that the two round-ups which resulted in the applicant's detention were general in nature. The applicant argues that young Tamils were the main targets of those measures and that the arrests were not intended to protect the general population, but were acts of vengeance by the state against a particular group.
[7]
This issue turns on the appreciation of the evidence which the Board had before it. I believe that the Board had sufficient evidence to allow it to conclude that the measures in question were law enforcement procedures which were intended to respond to the two massive terrorist bomb attacks and which were aimed at the protection of the population in general. The Board, on the evidence, was entitled to conclude as it did, and with due respect to the contrary view, I have been unable to identify any capriciousness or perversity in its findings of fact.
[8]
As to the second attack, it is apparent that the Board was on solid ground in framing its decision on the basis that systematic and persistent persecution was inherent in the notion of "persecution" as found in the Convention refugee definition. In particular, I have in mind the decision of the Court of Appeal in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at pp. 133 and 134.
[9]
On the basis of that decision, I believe that it was open to the Board to conclude that applicant's detention arising from two generalized round-ups taking place some three years apart did not constitute acts of systematic and persistent persecution. On the facts and in light of the applicable law, it was open to the Board to conclude as it did. What, in effect, the applicant is asking this court to do is to substitute its own appreciation of the facts to that of the Board. This I do not believe I can do on a judicial review irrespective of my inclinations in that regard.
[10]
Finally, counsel for the applicant has asked that, in the event that the application be denied, the following question be certified under s. 83(1) of the
Act
: "Whether or not persecution within the meaning of the Convention refugee definition requires systematic and persistent acts or whether or not a single or a couple of violation of nonderogable basic and inalienable rights is enough to constitute persecutory treatment?"
[11]
Counsel for the respondent consented to this question being certified as framed. From that I understand that the respondent Minister is also of the view that the question, as framed, is a serious question of general importance and that it should be dealt with by the Court of Appeal. That being so and as otherwise the question properly arises from the present matter, I will certify it. An order is issued certifying that a serious question of general importance is involved in this matter and stating that question. Otherwise the application is dismissed.
[12]
Counsel will note that the question has been slightly modified in order to ensure that it addresses the specific question involved in this matter. Also, I have noted that the word "derogable", as used in the proposed question, has no dictionary meaning. I have accordingly inserted different language which, I believe, conveys the meaning which was intended by the parties. This makes for a question that is less than elegant, but nevertheless understandable.
[13]
The question certified will read: "Whether 'persecution' within the meaning of the Convention refugee definition requires systematic and persistent acts or whether one (or two) violation of basic and inalienable rights, from which there can be no derogation, such as that to which the applicant was subjected to, is enough to constitute 'persecution'?"
[14]
Thank you very much.
Application denied;
certification granted.
Editor: Gary w. McLaughlin/sms
[End of document]