[1]
Pinard, J.
: In this action, the plaintiffs claim relief against the defendants in respect to the alleged infringement of certain trademarks and the alleged breach of s. 7(b), (c) and (e) of the
Trade Marks Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. T-13. These reasons are in support of a judgment which disposes of the plaintiffs' action against the defendant Toshie Endo (also known as Toshie Wilson) only.
[2]
Plaintiff Louis Vuitton, S.A. ("Vuitton") is a corporation under French law having its head office and principal place of business in Paris, France, and is a manufacturer of luggage, leather goods and accessories.
[3]
Plaintiff Luxury Luggage Toronto, Inc. ("Luxury") is a corporation under Canadian law, having its head office in Toronto, Ontario, and is in the business of importing, distributing and selling in Canada wares manufactured by Vuitton.
[4]
Defendant Toshie Endo is also known as Toshie Wilson; she resides and is domiciled in West Vancouver, British Columbia, where at all relevant times she has been in the business of importing and distributing leather goods, salmon skin goods and other accessories.
[5]
Vuitton is the registered owner of the LV design and Louis Vuitton trademarks, as follows:
Trademark:	Louis Vuitton
Reg. no.:	TMA 288.667
Reg. date:	9 March 1984
Registered for the following wares:
"Articles de maroquinerie, nommément: bagages, valises, sacs et housses de tout genre, portefeuilles, porte-monnaies, pochettes pour clés, carnets d'adresses, étuis à lunettes et parapluies."
Trademark:	Louis Vuitton
Reg. no.:	TMA 327.219
Reg. date:	8 May 1987
Registered for the following services:
"Opération de magasins offrant en vente des articles de maroquinerie, nommément: bagages, valises, sacs et housses de tout genre, portefeuilles, porte-monnaies, pochettes pour clés, carnets d'adresses, étuis à lunettes et parapluies."
[6]
Trademark:	LV (design)
[See printed version]
Reg. no.:	TMA 287.463
Reg. date:	3 February 1984
Wares:
"Articles de maroquinerie, nommément: bagages, valises, sacs et housses de tout genre, portefeuilles, porte-monnaies, pochettes pour clés, carnets d'adresses, étuis à lunettes et parapluies."
[7]
Trademark:	LV (design)
[See printed version]
Reg. no.:	TMA 326.814
Reg. date:	24 April 1987
"Opération de magasins offrant en vente des articles de maroquinerie, nommément: bagages, valises, sacs et housses de tout genre, portefeuilles, porte-monnaies, pochettes pour clés, carnets d'adresses, étuis à lunettes et parapluies."
[8]
In addition, Vuitton is the registered owner of the LV design mark as follows:
Trade Mark:	LV (design)
[See printed version]
Reg. no.:	TMA 352.916
Reg. date:	10 March 1989
Wares:
"Articles de maroquinerie, nommément: bagages, valises, sacs et housses de tout genre, portefeuilles, porte-monnaies, pochettes pour clés, carnets d'adresses, étuis à lunettes et parapluies."
[9]
Luxury is recorded as registered user of all of the above trademarks registrations (the "Vuitton trademarks").
[10]
The plaintiffs contend that the defendant Toshie Endo has imported, offered for sale distributed and sold wares which even though they bore the Vuitton trademarks, were not manufactured and did not emanate from Vuitton and were indeed counterfeit copies of genuine Vuitton products. The plaintiffs submit that by her illegal and illicit activities above, the defendant Toshie Endo has wilfully, maliciously and with full knowledge of their rights:
a: infringed Vuitton's exclusive rights in its trademarks registered under nos. TMA 288.667, TMA 287.463, TMA 327.219, TMA 352.916, in breach of the provisions of ss. 19 and 20 of the
Trade Marks Act
;
b: depreciated the value of the goodwill attaching to the said trademarks registrations;
c: passed off her wares for those of plaintiffs;
d: directed public attention to her wares, services or business in such a way as to cause or be likely to cause confusion in Canada;
e: carried out acts and businesses practices contrary to honest industrial and commercial usage in Canada.
[11]
Consequently, the plaintiffs claim the following reliefs against the defendant Toshie Endo:
"A) An order for a permanent injunction restraining the defendant, directly or indirectly, from:
a) infringing the exclusive rights of Louis Vuitton, S.A. under the registered trademarks, being registration nos. TMA 288.667, TMA 287.463, TMA 327.219, TMA 326.814 and TMA 352.916 (the 'Vuitton trademarks');
b) manufacturing, importing, selling, offering for sale, distributing, transferring, shipping, redirecting shipment, or otherwise dealing with luggage, bags, accessories or articles or any kind bearing the Vuitton trademarks;
c) using the Vuitton trademarks or any other trademark confusing with the Vuitton trademarks in association with luggage, bags, accessories or other articles of any kind, or in advertising, promoting or displaying the same in association with such marks; and
d) directing public attention to her wares in such a way to cause or be likely to cause confusion in Canada between her wares and the wares of Louis Vuitton, S.A.
"B) An order requiring the defendant to remit to plaintiffs all wares, labels, containers, or other goods which may be in her possession, bearing the words Louis Vuitton, or the LV design as appears at trademark registration no. TMA 287.463, or registration no. TMA 352.916, or any other words or designs confusingly similar thereto, and that plaintiffs may proceed to the destruction of such goods, at defendant's expense.
"C) An order for an accounting of defendant's profits or for damages to be determined by this Court, as the plaintiffs may elect, including punitive and exemplary damages.
"D) An order for costs in favour of the plaintiffs, on a solicitor-client basis.
"E) Any other order which this Court may deem just and expedient."
[12]
At trial, counsel for the plaintiffs indicated that the latter elected for an accounting of profits instead of damages. They also asked that the matter be dealt with at that stage. As no reference in that regard was requested by any of the parties, I will, therefore, also dispose of the question of profits.
[13]
This is a case where not only infringement of trademarks, but also counterfeiting of the wares such marks were used in association with are bluntly admitted by the party at fault. On two different occasions, first during her examination on discovery and then at trial, the defendant has admitted that she imported from Korea into Canada, during the years 1987 and 1988, counterfeit products bearing the Vuitton trademarks, which she distributed and sold to different retailers operating Japanese gifts shops in Vancouver, B.C., Whistler, B.C., and Banff, Alberta. Although she began by saying that she did not know at the time that what she was doing was illegal she finally confirmed her knowledge of some wrong doing when, during her cross-examination, she answered: "I did not think it was that much a problem". In any event, I am convinced, in light of all the evidence, including correspondence between the defendant and her husband in November 1987, that the defendant at the relevant time was very well aware of the illegality of her activities, although she may well have under-estimated the seriousness of the consequences.
[14]
Such admitted illegal and illicit activities by the defendant Toshie Endo fully justify the issuance of the orders requested by the plaintiffs for a permanent injunction and for the remittance and the destruction of all counterfeit Vuitton products.
[15]
The plaintiffs will also be entitled to the defendant's profits, the accounting of which in the present circumstances, must be determined by a differential or incremental approach as did Mr. Justice Addy in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  I have also applied the same principles as those explained as follows by Mr. Justice Addy in the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case (supra), at page 209:
"Where the defendant, as in the present case, has been found at fault and has been ordered to account, that obligation to account rests without reservation entirely on him. There exists no onus whatsoever in this respect on the owner of the property. The judgment obliges the defendant to account for the full amount of all reenue received from the use of the property. Negligent or wilful failure to declare any such amounts might well render the infringer guilty of contempt of court. The amount so declared becomes payable to the rightful owner of the property and is subject to be reduced only by such bona fide expenses or disbursements as the infringer can by positive evidence establish as having been actually incurred. ..."
and, at page 213:
"To summarize: the infringer is entitled to deduct only those expenses, both variable and fixed, which actually contributed to the sums received and for which he is liable to account. It follows that no part or proportion of any expenditure which would have been incurred had the infringing operation not taken place, is to be considered as deductible."
[16]
In the case at bar, the defendant admits to having paid a maximum amount of $25,000 for all the counterfeit Vuitton products she has imported at the relevant times. She also admits to having sold the products at a price two to three times the price she paid for them herself. Finally, she states that all her unsold Vuitton products have been remitted by her former attorney to counsel for the plaintiffs and that such unsold products constitute about 50% of all the counterfeit Vuitton products she has imported. Finally, she admits to having been paid in full for all the products she has in fact sold. Accepting the defendant's own figures, it would appear that with respect to the products she actually sold, she made profits not exceeding $25,000, since there is no positive evidence of any other bona fide expenses or disbursements which would not have been incurred had the infringing operation not taken place.
[17]
On the other hand, the plaintiffs filed various invoices from the defendant to her customers; in spite of the fact that some of those invoices also include other products which are not always clearly identified, counsel for the plaintiffs submit nevertheless that the invoices establish the defendant's profits to some $30,000 to $40,000.
[18]
Upon consideration of all those admissions, documents and circumstances I conclude that the defendant's profits are in the amount of $30,000; therefore, the plaintiffs are entitled to this amount.
[19]
Finally, I consider that blatant illegal and illicit activities such as those involved in the present case ought to be discouraged by adjudicating higher costs than those normally adjudicated on a client to client basis. In this particular case, however, the defendant's operations are on a rather limited scale. Also, the defendant has already remitted her unsold counterfeit products to plaintiffs' counsel. Accordingly, in view of these particular circumstances, costs will be adjudicated in the amount of $12,000, being slightly more than half the value of the solicitor-client costs established by the evidence to $23,681.94. No other punitive adjudication need made in this matter.
[20]
Judgment will be rendered accordingly.
Judgment for plaintiff.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/slm
Footnotes
1.	(1982), 68 C.P.R.(2d) 204 (F.C.T.D.).
[End of document]