[1] Wetston, J.
: The applicant is a 65 year old citizen of Cuba. He was the minister of a Pentecostal Evangelical Church of Cuba in Havana from 1965 to 1990 when he left Cuba. He claims to have a well-founded fear of persecution on the basis of religion and political opinion. The applicant's claim rests upon incidents which have occurred over a period of twenty-five years. The acts to which the applicant has been subjected are the result of the repression of religion undertaken by the totalitarian regime of Fidel Castro. These acts, all undertaken by agents of the state, included detention and questioning, reprimands for speaking against the government during a sermon, restrictions on the location and frequency of services, searches of his parish, and the interruption of a service during which the contents of his parish were destroyed.
[2]
The applicant left Cuba to travel to Canada on October 14, 1990. At the time of his departure he was in possession of a valid travel permit which allowed him to be absent from Cuba for thirty days.
[3]
The board held that the discrimination and harassment inflicted on the applicant was not sufficiently severe to constitute persecution even when all the incidents were considered cumulatively. Further, they found that any punishment the applicant would face upon return to Cuba for overstaying his exit permit would not amount to persecution as the applicant could not adduce evidence to suggest that the potential punishment would be disproportionate to the offence.
[4]
The applicant submits that board improperly applied the definition to Convention refugee found in s. 2(1) of the
Immigration Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2. Contrary to the submissions of the applicant, I cannot find that the board erred in failing to consider the cumulative effect of the harassment and discrimination suffered by the applicant over the past twenty five years. With respect to this consideration, the board made the following determinations at page three of their reasons:
"Because of his religion the claimant underwent
incidents of harassment and discrimination dating back to the 1960s
. There is no doubt that this is annoying and even frightening. However, the detentions and questioning do not amount to persecution in this case.
"The claimant
alleges five incidents of harassment
in 28 years of church work. He was unable to recall any incidents since 1983 of pastors being taken into 'concentration camps and never being heard from again.'
"
We believe that the claimant was a victim of harassment and discrimination
but even when considered cumulatively this does not amount to persecution. The claimant continued to work as a pastor up to the time of his exit from Cuba" (Emphasis mine)
[5]
I am not satisfied that the board considered only the five incidents of harassment which they detailed at the beginning of their reasons. The board indicates that they accepted that the applicant had been the victim of both harassment and discrimination. This suggests that they also took into account the persistent government surveillance and reprimands testified to by the applicant and found these actions to constitute discrimination. They distinguished the five incidents which they specifically detailed and referred to them as harassment. Therefore, the board properly considered the cumulative effect of all the incidents suffered by the applicant.
[6]
Further, it was open to the board to find that the harassment and discrimination inflicted upon the applicant was not sufficiently serious to constitute persecution,
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  persecution is not easy to draw. However, I am of the opinion that the board properly considered and weighed the evidence before them. The board considered both the actions of the government against the individual applicant and the overall atmosphere created by the State's intolerance of religion in Cuba as detailed in the documentary evidence. I cannot find that the conclusion of the board was made in an unreasonable or capricious manner.
[7]
The second ground of review which I find necessary to consider is whether the board erred in their determination that any prosecution the applicant may face on his return to Cuba for overstaying his exit visa and claiming asylum in Canada would not amount to persecution. In considering this issue the board concluded at page five of their reasons:
"The claimant has overstayed his exit permit. He could be granted an extension or he could be punished for overstaying. It is the opinion of the Division that any prosecution to which he might be subjected as the result of overstaying would not amount to persecution unless he could establish that the punishment meted out to him would be disproportionate to the offence committed for a Convention reason. No such evidence was adduced."
[8]
There was no conclusive evidence before the board with respect to the severity of penalties subjected on those who face the same offence as that to be potentially faced by the applicant. There was evidence before the board that those seeking asylum at foreign embassies in Cuba have been subjected to as much as forty-five years in prison. This is not the offence that the applicant would potentially be charged with and therefore, the board could not speculate that this would be the penalty faced. However, there was also evidence before the board that those who leave the country illegally have been subject to penalties ranging from fines to three years' imprisonment.
[9]
Cuban exit laws are laws of general application. However, this finding alone does not end the matter for the law still must be examined to determine whether it is persecutory. One indication that a general law is persecutory is a penalty which is disproportionate to the offence. I cannot find that the board erred in deciding that the potential punishment for violation of the exit laws by the applicant did not amount to persecution. The onus is on the applicant to bring evidence before the board of the punishment to be faced upon return and to demonstrate that the punishment is disproportionate to the offence committed and therefore persecutory:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.) The onus has not been met in this case.
[10]
For all the above reasons, I would dismiss the application.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Janette Blue/saf
[End of document]