[1]
McKeown, J.
: The issue is whether the plaintiff is entitled to deduct an inventory allowance in the amount of $652,754 in 1977 giving rise to a noncapital loss which is sought to carry back to its 1976 taxation year. The matter comes before me as an appeal by way of a statement of claim from the decision of the Associate Chief Justice of the Tax Court of Canada who concluded that the taxpayer was not entitled to the deduction. The plaintiff conceded that it was not entitled to a deduction with respect to the inventory allowance on the nonfinished goods (i.e. the work in process and raw materials) portion of the inventory. The plaintiff seeks to have the matter referred back to the Minister of National Revenue for reconsideration and reassessment on the basis of granting an inventory allowance in respect of the finished goods inventory.
Facts
[2]
There was no material disagreement on the facts except with respect to the relevance of certain admissions which I will deal with later. The plaintiff "was incorporated under the laws of Canada. The appellant's fiscal period ended on December 31 and consequently its taxation year is a calendar year." The 1977 calendar year of the plaintiff comprised 365 days.
[3]
On September 27, 1976, GSW entered into a "Foundation Agreement" with Canadian General Electric Company Limited ("CGE"). The first recital thereof stated their "wish to integrate their respective major appliance businesses into a new Canadian major appliance company". For this purpose GSW and CGE agreed to cause a company to be incorporated under the
Canada Business Corporations Act
, and Canadian Appliance Manufacturing Company Limited-Limitée ("Camco") was subsequently incorporated on December 6, 1976. By para. 4 of the Foundation Agreement, GSW covenanted to "enter into an Asset Transfer Agreement" with Camco substantially in the form of Exhibit C attached thereto "whereby, among other things, GSW will agree to convey and transfer and cause its subsidiaries to convey and transfer to the Company [Camco] to the extent provided for in such agreement the assets and properties used by it and by its subsidiaries in carrying on the business of manufacture, sale and servicing of major appliances". Under para. 5 CGE also undertook to enter into a similar agreement with Camco. Paragraph 6 provided in part:
"The completion of the conveyance and transfer of such properties and assets for each of GSW and CGE to the Company [Camco] will take place on January 4, 1977 or on such other date as may be agreed to in writing by GSW and CGE (the 'Closing Date') but effective as of the commencement of January 1, 1977, both such dates being subject to change as provided in Exhibits 'C' and 'D' attached hereto (such Exhibits being the respective Asset Transfer Agreement for each of GSW and CGE)."
Paragraph 10(3) stated that the plaintiff was one of three named subsidiaries of GSW through whom the major appliance business of GSW was primarily owned and carried on. GSW agreed to cause each such subsidiary to take all action required to implement the terms of the Foundation Agreement and the exhibits thereto.
[4]
On December 3, 1976, in accordance with the provisions of s. 247 of the
Business Corporations Act
of the Province of Ontario (which section related to voluntary dissolutions), the shareholders of the plaintiff adopted a resolution that the plaintiff be dissolved pursuant to the said s. 247. The resolution further provided that as incidental thereto, the property of the plaintiff be distributed rateably among its shareholders.
[5]
GSW entered into an Asset Transfer Agreement with Camco, made as of December 28, 1976. Section 12.1 of the Agreement provided for the closing of the transactions contemplated by the Agreement stating:
"
The Closing
. Subsection to s. 12.2, the closing (the 'Closing') of the transactions contemplated hereby shall take place at the offices of ... at 2:00 p.m. on January 4, 1977 or at such other place and time as shall be fixed by agreement of the parties (the 'Closing Date') but with effect as of the commencement of January 1, 1977 (the 'Effective Date')."
[6]
The Asset Transfer Agreement defined the expression "GSWS" as meaning GSW and its three wholly owned subsidiaries through which it was engaged in its appliance operations, identifying the plaintiff as one of the three subsidiaries. Section 2.1 reads as follows:
"2.1
Purchase and Sale of the Acquired Assets
"Upon and subject to the terms and conditions hereof, GSWS shall sell, transfer, assign and deliver to the Company, and the Company shall purchase and acquire, at the Closing (but with effect as of the Effective Date), all of the property and assets (other than Excluded Assets) of GSWS's Major Appliance Operations (hereafter collectively called the 'Acquired Assets')."
[7]
Provisions in the Asset Transfer Agreement relevant to this appeal include s. 6.2 which provided that GSWS shall during the period from December 28, 1976 to the Closing Date (the date on which the Closing shall occur pursuant to s. 12.1) conduct its Major Appliance Operations only in the ordinary and usual course thereof. Section 6.3 stated that subject to Closing, GSWS shall from and after the Effective Date and until the time of Closing, carry on the Major Appliance Operations as agent for and on behalf of Camco. Section 12.1 provided that upon payment by Camco of the consideration payable at Closing and the delivery by GSWS of the Deeds, the Agreement was to operate "as and from the Effective Date, as a transfer of the Acquired Assets by GSWS to the Company [Camco]" but that GSWS and Camco shall nevertheless from time to time on and after the Closing Date execute further documents in order to effectuate the sale and transfer. The aforesaid provisions are set forth on Schedule "A" annexed hereto.
[8]
An Indenture made as of January 1, 1977, between the plaintiff and GSW, contained recitals to the effect that the plaintiff had authorized the distribution of all of its assets rateably to its shareholders and the filing of Articles of Dissolution under the
Business Corporations Act
and that GSW was the beneficial owner of all the issued and outstanding shares of the plaintiff. The Indenture provided that the plaintiff "doth hereby grant, bargain, assign, transfer, convey and set over unto" GSW the property of the plaintiff. The Indenture also contained the following provision:
"This Agreement is made by the [plaintiff] and received by [GSW] subject to all of the liabilities of the [plaintiff] which, by the acceptance hereof, [GSW] hereby expressly assumes and undertakes to pay and discharge and to indemnify and save harmless the [plaintiff] in respect thereof."
By virtue of such Indenture, all of the assets, property and business of the plaintiff, including its inventories were transferred to GSW.
[9]
The closing of the transactions contemplated in the Asset Transfer Agreement took place on January 4, 1977. A general conveyance instrument was executed by GSW and Camco, and delivered on January 4, 1977. The document was entitled "THIS INDENTURE made as of January 1, 1977". The first recital thereto referred to the GSW Asset Transfer Agreement providing for the sale of the Major Appliance Operations of GSW and its subsidiaries "as, at and from the date hereof and all the interests of the subsidiaries of GSW in the assets hereby conveyed having been conveyed to GSW". The granting clause of the Indenture provided in part as follows:
"GSW doth hereby grant, bargain, sell, assign, transfer, convey and set over unto the Company [Camco] its successors and assigns, as at the date hereof, ... all of the property and assets of GSWS's Major Appliance Operations ... owned and used by GSWS or held by them for use in or in respect of such major appliance operations, including without limitation;
(iii) All inventories of Major Appliances (being the appliances listed in Schedule 'D' hereto) in a finished state, all replacement, service and component parts (including for this purpose wringer washing machine parts) and all raw materials and work in process inventories, which said inventories, parts and materials are generally described by category and location in Schedule 'E';"
Included in the inventories so described in item (iii), were the inventories of the plaintiff conveyed to GSW comprising those in a finished state and those comprising parts and raw materials and work in process.
[10]
A Bill of Sale of the described and enumerated personal property of GSW, including its inventories of Major Appliances in a finished state, and all parts and all raw materials and work in process inventories, was made, executed and delivered January 4, 1977 by GSW in favour of Camco. The recital stated that GSW had agreed with Camco by agreement dated as of December 28, 1976 for the sale of such personal property. The granting clause provided that GSW "does bargain, sell, assign, transfer and set over unto [Camco] as of January 1, 1977" the enumerated property.
[11]
In its income tax return for its 1977 taxation year, the plaintiff claimed an allowance pursuant to s. 20(1)(gg) of the
Income Tax Act
(the "
Act
") in the amount of $652,754 and claimed a noncapital loss in that taxation year in the amount of $652,754.
[12]
The amount claimed by the plaintiff pursuant to s. 20(1)(gg) of the
Act
, was 3% of the cost amount (as defined in s. 248(1) of the
Act
) to the plaintiff, at the commencement of the 1977 taxation year of the plaintiff, of the tangible property (other than real property or an interest therein) that was described in the plaintiff's inventory in respect of the business at the commencement of 1977.
[13]
Pursuant to s. 152(6) of the
Act
, the plaintiff filed an amended income tax return for its 1976 taxation year claiming in the computation of its taxable income a deduction from income in the amount of $652,754 under s. 111 of the
Act
, in respect of the noncapital loss claimed in its 1977 taxation year.
[14]
There was an admission of fact made by the defendant but the evidence was objected to on the grounds of relevancy. The admission reads as follows:
"Neither GSW Limited-GSW Limitée, the parent corporation of plaintiff, Camco Inc. obtained the benefit of the inventory allowance in respect of the inventory of the plaintiff for which the plaintiff claim and was denied the inventory allowance. The taxation year of each of GSW Limited-GSW Limitée and Camco Inc. was the calendar year."
[15]
I agree with the Minister's objection that each taxpayer's affairs are dealt with individually and it would be impossible to determine the effect of the failure of GSW Limited-GSW Limitée or Camco Inc. to take advantage of the inventory allowance without looking into their returns in detail. Accordingly, this evidence will not be considered by me.
[16]
By Notice of Reassessment No. 623042, dated May 10, 1982, in respect of the plaintiff's 1976 taxation year, the said deduction from income in the amount of $652,754 claimed by the plaintiff under s. 111 of the
Act
in its amended income tax return for its 1976 taxation year in respect of the noncapital loss claimed by the plaintiff in its 1977 taxation year, was not applied by the Minister of National Revenue in the computation of the taxable income of the plaintiff. An appeal by the plaintiff was heard by the Tax Court of Canada and by decision dated May 9, 1985, the appeal was dismissed. The plaintiff then brought this appeal by way of a statement of claim.
[17]
On the basis of the December 31, 1976 balance sheet included in the financial statements filed with its 1976 tax return, the aggregate liabilities of the plaintiff at December 31, 1976 totalled $28,371,022 ($25,930,043 current liabilities plus $2,333,801 provision for warranties plus $117,178 note payable to parent company). The total assets reflected on such balance sheet were $39,577,232 of which inventories were recorded at $21,603,830. Under the Indenture between the plaintiff and GSW made as of January 1, 1977, the assumption of GSW of all of the liabilities of the plaintiff resulted in a portion of such liabilities assumed being allocable to the inventories of the plaintiff.
[18]
The inventories of the plaintiff at December 31, 1976 and hence at the commencement of its 1977 taxation year, comprised finished goods inventory and raw material and work in process inventory. Although an allocation as between such two classes of inventory was not disclosed on the December 31, 1976 balance sheet of the plaintiff, or in the notes thereto, such allocation does exist in the working papers of the plaintiff.
[19]
During its 1977 taxation year, the plaintiff prepared its financial statements for its 1976 fiscal period dated September 28, 1977, and the income tax return for its 1976 taxation year was dated October 3, 1977.
Law And Disposition
[20]
It is important to set out s. 20(1)(gg) of the
Income Tax Act
as it read at the relevant time:
"20(1) Notwithstanding paragraphs 18(1) (a), (b) and (h), in computing a taxpayer's income for a taxation year from a business or property, there may be deducted such of the following amounts as are wholly applicable to that source or such part of the following amounts as may reasonably be regarded as applicable thereto:
(gg) an amount in respect of any business carried on by the taxpayer in the year, equal to that portion of 3% of the cost amount to the taxpayer, at the commencement of the year, of the tangible property (other than real property or an interest therein) that was
(i) described in the taxpayer's inventory in respect of the business, and
(ii) held by him for sale or for the purposes of being processed, fabricated, manufactured, incorporated into, attached to, or otherwise converted into or used in the packaging of, property for sale in the ordinary course of the business
that the number of days in the year is of 365."
[21]
This section first appeared in the
Income Tax Act
when it was introduced in the March 31, 1977 budget by the Minister of Finance. The section was made applicable to fiscal periods of business commencing after 1976 and to fiscal periods ending after March 31, 1977 except that in its application to fiscal periods that end after March 31, 1977 and commenced before 1977 there were certain rules which are not relevant here.
[22]
I must also review the elements required to qualify for the deduction.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 87 D.T.C. 314 (T.C.C.), appeal to the Federal Court of Appeal dismissed (1992), 142 N.R. 79; 54 F.T.R. 239; 92 D.T.C. 6252 (citing to 89 D.T.C.) Teitelbaum, J., stated at pp. 5367 and 5368:
"To qualify for the deduction, the inventory on hand at the start of the fiscal period must be tangible property (other than real estate or an interest therein) and must meet two basic requirements:
(1) it (the tangible property) must be described in the taxpayer's inventory in respect of the business; and
(2) it must be property held for sale or for the purpose of being processed, fabricated, manufactured, incorporated into, attached to or otherwise converted into or used in the packaging of property for sale in the ordinary course of business.
"A failure to establish all the elements of s. 20(1)(gg) of the ITA results in a disentitlement to the deduction.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.) at p. 5023."
[23]
In light of the wording in s. 20(1)(gg) the plaintiff conceded that work in progress and raw materials could not be part of the inventory since the taxpayer did not make the sale in the ordinary course of business. The real issue in this case comes down to whether the taxpayer held the inventory for sale in 1977. I agree with the plaintiff that the finished inventory does not have to be held "in the ordinary course of business". The pertinent question is whether the finished inventory was held for sale by the plaintiff.
[24]
Inventory must be dealt with in the trading context. This is illustrated by the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.T.C. 5019 (F.C.A.). The issue in that case was whether the taxpayer had any right to the inventory allowance where it dealt in consigned goods. Urie, J., at p. 5022 stated:
"Paragraph 20(1)(gg) must, of course, be read in the context of the
Act
as a whole. The principal sections relevant in its interpretation for purposes of this appeal include the definitions of 'inventory' and 'cost amount' set out in subsection 248(1), subsection 9(1), and subsection 10(1) and (2). Those sections read as follows:
. . . . .
'248(1) In this Act,
"'Inventory' means a description of property, the cost or value of which is relevant in computing a taxpayer's income from a business for a taxation year.
. . . . .
'cost amount' to a taxpayer of any property at any time means, except as expressly otherwise provided in this Act,
(c) where the property was property described in an inventory of the taxpayer, its value at that time as determined for the purpose of computing his income,"
. . . . .
'9. Income from business or property.
'(1) Subject to this Part, a taxpayer's income for a taxation year from a business or property is his profit therefrom for the year.
. . . . .
'10. Valuation of inventory property.
'(1) For the purpose of computing income from a business, the property described in an inventory shall be valued at its cost to the taxpayer or its fair market value, whichever is lower, or in such other manner as may be permitted by regulation.
. . . . .
'10(2) Notwithstanding subsection (1), for the purpose of computing income for a taxation year from a business, the property described in an inventory at the commencement of the year shall be valued at the same amount as the amount at which it was valued at the end of the immediately preceding year for the purpose of computing income for that preceding year.'"
[25]
Urie, J., continues at p. 5023:
"First and foremost, it is clear from the definition that for property to be 'inventory' in a taxation year, its cost or value must be relevant in the computation of income from a business in that year. By virtue of subsection 9(1) income for a taxation year from a business is the profit therefrom for the year. The significance of the inclusion of 'inventory' in the calculation of income from a business in a taxation year is well illustrated in the following passage from the unanimous judgment of the Supreme Court of Canada delivered by Martland, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 5348 citing with approval the judgment of Jackett, C.J., in this court:
'... As Chief Justice Jackett points out, the practice "hardened into a rule of law" in the computation of the profit of a trading business is to deduct from the aggregate proceeds of all sales
the cost of sales
computed
by adding the value placed on inventory
at the beginning of the year to the cost of acquisitions to inventory during the year,
less the value of inventory
at the end of the year.'" (emphasis added)
[26]
In the case before me simply because the inventory was transferred to Camco on January 4th does not mean that it was inventory held for sale. It was not available for sale on January 1, 2, 3 and 4. The inventory was already committed to Camco. There were certain conditions in the agreement which Camco had to meet before it was entitled to take legal title to the property. However, there were no indications from Camco that the agreement would not be completed and the only reason the deal was not completed January 4th was because the first three days of 1977 were not business days. Urie, J., went on to say at p. 5023:
"In order for a taxpayer to meet the paragraph 20(1)(gg) requirement holding property for sale,
he must have property in it which he can sell
. Here, as I noted above, the property in the ships was vested in the purchasers and not in the plaintiff taxpayer. As a result, the plaintiff
did not have property in the ships
which he could sell and,
therefore, he could not be said to be holding them for sale within the meaning of paragraph 20(1)(gg)
. As a result, it was not eligible to claim a reserve pursuant to that paragraph. The appeal with respect to this issue must fail. (emphasis added)
"The facts in this case are, of course, substantially different from those in the
Burrard Yarrows
case but there can be no doubt, in my view, that similarly for the paragraph to apply in the factual situation in this case, the taxpayer must have a property interest in the inventory upon which he seeks the allowance. Accordingly, in my view, the trial judge erred in holding, as he seems to have done, that ownership or property in the inventory in issue is not required so long as 'it be part of the taxpayer's stock-in-trade'. His finding fails to appreciate the scheme of the
Act
as it relates to inventories and to the jurisprudence relating thereto."
[27]
In the case before me the taxpayer had already committed the inventory to be sold pursuant to the agreements made in 1976. In fact these agreements were completed and the inventory was sold as part of the overall sale. The December 28th and September 27th agreements amount to equitable transfers. The completion of the transfer of inventory in 1977 does not constitute carrying on business.
[28]
The plaintiff submitted that on the winding up of a subsidiary the rules of s. 88(1)(a) apply with respect to each property of the subsidiary distributed to the parent for the purpose of deferring to the parent any gain which would otherwise have been made by the subsidiary under the distribution of property. The plaintiff further submitted that the structure of these rules and in particular the rule relating to the distribution of eligible capital property (the goodwill of the business) from a subsidiary to its parent corporation, establish that where the assets of the business are distributed, the business of the subsidiary is carried on until after the completion of the distribution, so that the subsidiary is carrying on business at the time of distribution of property.
[29]
However, s. 88 has an entirely different focus. It is dealing with the time when a company is going out of business and s. 20 is applicable where the company is staying in business. Section 88 is not intended to establish the deeming provision for any other section nor does it establish that in any case where there is a sale from a subsidiary to its parent corporation and a distribution of eligible capital property that for all sections of the
Act
the business of the subsidiary is carried on until after completion of the distribution. Section 88 is designed to prevent any tax consequences arising from the rollover in the scenario therein laid out.
[30]
Furthermore
Income Tax Application Rules
, s. 21(1) enacted in the
Income Tax Application Rules 1971
as Part III of c. 63, S.C. 1970-71-72 does not assist the plaintiff. It sets out a factual basis and says if the taxpayer has the same facts the following rules apply. It does not say for all purposes the taxpayer is deemed to be carrying on business.
[31]
The plaintiff submitted that certain
Income Tax Interpretation Bulletins
confirmed that there was a sale under s. 88 and accordingly the deeming provisions applicable. However, there is nothing in any of the bulletins that states in circumstances similar to the case before me that the taxpayer is entitled to take the inventory allowance deduction. The
Income Tax Interpretation Bulletins
are correct if one is dealing with factual circumstances as contemplated therein.
[32]
Since the plaintiff did not hold tangible property (inventory herein) for sale on January 1st it cannot meet one of the essential elements of s. 20(1)(gg)(ii) it is therefore not entitled to the deduction with respect to the inventory allowance on the finished goods portion of the inventory. I agree that the plaintiff was not entitled to the deduction with respect to the inventory allowance on the nonfinished goods. The plaintiff's appeal is dismissed with costs to the defendant.
Appeal dismissed.
Editor: Debra F. MacCausland/sms
[End of document]