 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (FC)
MLB unedited judgment
[French language version follows English language version]
[La version française vient à la suite de la version anglaise]
The Minister of Citizenship and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  CF 276)
Indexed As: Canada (Minister of Citizenship and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
Federal Court
Tremblay-Lamer, J.
March 21, 2014.
Counsel:
Patricia Nobl, for the applicant;
Stéphanie Valois, for the respondents.
Solicitors of Record:
William F. Pentney, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Montreal, Quebec, for the applicant;
Stéphanie Valois, B.C.L, L.L.B, Montreal, Quebec, for the respondents.
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary. Any footnotes found in this case will appear below end of document.
[1]
Tremblay-Lamer, J.
: This is an application for judicial review pursuant to section 72(1) of the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act
, SC 2001, c 27 (the Act) of a decision of the Refugee Protection Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board (the Board) dated April 30, 2013 wherein the Board determined that the respondents are Convention refugees.
FACTS
[2]
The principal respondent (male respondent), his spouse (female respondent), and their two minor children are all citizens of Croatia, a designated country of origin pursuant to section 109.1 of the Act.
[3]
The respondents are of Serbian ethnicity. They assert that because of their membership in the Serbian community, they have had difficulty in obtaining work, suffered discrimination in the workplace, and were verbally harassed.
[4]
The respondents' son alleges having suffered multiple events of aggression by other children, including an incident in September, 2011 where a 15 year-old neighbour planted a kitchen knife in the ground and yelled that he would slaughter him as he is a Serb.
[5]
They also allege that on or about November 18, 2012, an unknown individual threw a brick through the bathroom window of the family residence and returned later to shout insults at the female respondent.
[6]
The respondents came to Canada on January 12, 2013 and claimed refugee status.
THE DECISION UNDER REVIEW
[7]
The Board issued a very succinct decision finding that the respondents were Convention refugees.
[8]
The Board found that for the majority of their testimony, including the discrimination they had suffered as well as the acts of physical violence suffered by their son, the respondents were credible witnesses. However, it did not accept the respondents' testimony about a final series of events where the respondents had claimed that a man had presented himself at their residence to threaten them. Inconsistencies and adjustments in testimony led the Board to conclude that these events never happened, and that the respondents had attempted to mislead the Board by adding this event to their otherwise credible testimony.
[9]
The Board found that the incessant and repeated number of acts of discrimination suffered by all members of the family by reason of their nationality, particularly their son being beaten and the discrimination suffered by the female respondent in finding employment, amounted to persecution.
[10]
The Board found that state protection would not be reasonably forthcoming in this particular case. The respondents had made several attempts to obtain protection from police authorities and the Board considered that although the police responded on every occasion, they consistently failed to provide an adequate level of protection to the family.
[11]
Addressing an internal flight alternative (IFA), the Board found that the documentary evidence confirmed that discrimination against ethnic Serbs exists throughout Croatia, and that on a balance of probabilities the respondents would not likely be able to find gainful employment in all of Croatia.
ISSUES
[12]
The issues in this application are:
1) Was the Board's analysis as to the presence of discrimination that amounts to persecution reasonable?
2) Was the Board's analysis of state protection reasonable?
3) Was the Board's analysis of the presence of a viable IFA reasonable?
STANDARD OF REVIEW
[13]
The Board's findings relating to discrimination, state protection, and IFA are all questions of fact or mixed fact and law and are all reviewable on a standard of reasonableness (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ];
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[14]
In reviewing the Board's decision on the standard of reasonableness, the Court should not intervene unless the Board came to a conclusion that is not transparent, justifiable and intelligible and within the range of acceptable outcomes based on the evidence before it (Dunsmuir, at para 47; Canada (Minister of Citizenship and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
ANALYSIS
Discrimination suffered by the respondents
[15]
The applicant acknowledges that an asylum claimant may demonstrate that the cumulative nature of the discrimination suffered amounts to persecution (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ), however this is not the case here.
[16]
I agree. The recognition of the cumulative effect of discriminatory acts does not mean that a claimant will meet their burden by simply alleging repeated acts of harm. As the Federal Court of Appeal found in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ressing this same issue of cumulative discrimination, "whether a claimant relies on a single or a number of events taken together, he still has the obligation to satisfy the Board that, at the time of the hearing, he has a well founded fear of persecution in regard to the country from which he seeks protection". While the Federal Court of Appeal in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> found that the line between persecution and discrimination is "difficult to establish", it held that "in all cases, it is for the Board to draw the conclusion in a particular factual context by proceeding with a careful analysis of the evidence adduced and a proper balancing of the various elements contained therein, and the intervention of this Court is not warranted unless the conclusion reached appears to be capricious or unreasonable".
[17]
Here, the Board's decision does not demonstrate a careful analysis or a proper balancing of the evidence and is therefore unreasonable. The Board's finding that the "incessant and repeated number of acts of discrimination suffered by all the members of the family" amounted to persecution simply does not accord with the evidence before it. While there is evidence that the respondent's son was ostracized by certain classmates and neighbourhood children, the Board's finding of repeated physical violence is not substantiated. In the respondent's own Basis of Claim (BOC) form, he alleged only one incident of physical violence against his son. Further, while the Board described the 2011 incident as one where a 15 year-old neighbour "beat your children", it is clear from the evidence that while threats were uttered, there was no physical act committed. The discriminatory acts suffered by the respondent's son were neither endorsed nor encouraged by the Croatian state authorities, and he was able to pursue his education, including his religious education,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . The Board's finding of discrimination amounting to persecution in the workplace context is similarly not supported by the evidence. Contrary to the Board's finding that the female respondent was unable to find employment for "numerous years", a review of the inconsistent work history provided shows that apart from a short period between 2008 and 2009, the female respondent was able to find work  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . Similarly, there is no indication that the male respondent had difficulty finding work; in fact he had held the same job as a gravedigger for 16 years before leaving Croatia. The Board's findings were not grounded in the evidence before it and its analysis of the cumulative effect of the discriminatory acts and the presence of persecution was inadequate.
State Protection
[18]
The applicant submits that the Board failed to apply the legal principles governing a state protection analysis. Moreover, the applicant argues that the Board's conclusions do not result from a careful analysis of the evidence, and that its analysis is quasi-inexistent.
[19]
Again, I agree. The Board's state protection analysis and its treatment of the evidence submitted were entirely inadequate. The Board's finding that the police "consistently failed to provide an adequate level of protection to your family" was not grounded in the evidence before it. It is recognized that the police responded on every occasion that they were called by the respondents and there was no evidence that the police failed to follow through on any investigations or failed to provide any services. This is especially true given the lack of police reports submitted and the fact that the respondents did not follow up with the police after the 2011 incident.
[20]
There is a presumption of state protection that the respondents had the burden to rebut (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). The Board's overly brief treatment of state protection does not address any of these legal principles and does not provide a reasonable basis upon which the Board could have decided as it did (
Alberta (Information and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
Internal Flight Alternative
[21]
When considering whether a claimant has a viable IFA, the test is two-pronged. First, the Board must determine that there is no serious possibility of the claimant being persecuted or being at risk in the chosen IFA. Secondly, the Board must determine if it is objectively reasonable to seek safety in the designated IFA (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[22]
The applicant submits that it appears that the Board erroneously combined these two steps into a single test, finding that discrimination against ethnic Serbs exists throughout Croatia, especially in relation to accessing employment and that the respondents would not be able to find gainful employment throughout Croatia. The Board also failed to consider if a city  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  outside a war affected region could be designated as an IFA.
[23]
Once again, I agree with the applicant. The Board's treatment of the existence of an IFA was deficient. It concluded that given the respondents' "limited skills and employment history", on a balance of probabilities they would not likely be able to find gainful employment in all of Croatia. Considering both the inconsistencies raised in the record as to the female respondent's employment history as well as the lack of evidence showing that employment as a gravedigger, cleaning person or personal aid would not be reasonably transferable to other areas of the country, the Board's finding is not grounded in the evidence before it.
CONCLUSION
[24]
Unfortunately for the respondents, the Board's decision is so deficient that it cannot be saved by the reasoning in
Newfoundland and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . As this Court recently noted in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> "
Newfoundland Nurses
is not an open invitation to the Court to provide reasons that were not given, nor is it licence to guess what findings might have been made or to speculate as to what the tribunal might have been thinking". In this case the Board failed to properly consider the evidence before it, and its analysis and reasons are so inadequate that they cannot be considered reasonable.
[25]
For these reasons, I would allow the application for judicial review. The matter is remitted for reassessment by a differently constituted panel.
JUDGMENT
[26]
THIS COURT'S JUDGMENT is that
:
This application for judicial review is allowed and the matter is remitted for reassessment by a differently constituted panel.
.........................
Le Ministre de la Citoyenneté et de l' <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Tremblay-Lamer
[Traduction]: Il s'agit d'une demande de contrôle judiciaire présentée en vertu du paragraphe 72(1) de la
Loi sur l'immigration et la protection des réfugiés,
L.C. 2001, ch. 27 (la Loi) d'une décision datée du 30 avril 2013 par laquelle la Section de la protection des réfugiés de la Commission de l'immigration et du statut de réfugié (la Commission) a conclu que les défendeurs étaient des réfugiés au sens de la Convention.
FAITS
[2]
Le défendeur principal, son épouse défenderesse, ainsi que leurs deux enfants mineurs sont tous citoyens de la Croatie, un pays d'origine désigné, aux termes de l'article 109.1 de la Loi.
[3]
Les défendeurs sont d'origine ethnique serbe. Ils font valoir qu'ils ont eu, en raison de leur appartenance à la communauté serbe, de la difficulté à trouver du travail, qu'ils ont été victimes de discrimination en milieu de travail et de harcèlement verbal.
[4]
Le fils des défendeurs soutient avoir été agressé de nombreuses fois par d'autres enfants, notamment lors d'un incident survenu en septembre 2011, où un voisin âgé de 15 ans a planté un couteau de cuisine dans le sol et a crié qu'il allait l'abattre parce qu'il est Serbe.
[5]
Les défendeurs ont aussi allégué que le ou vers le 18 novembre 2012, une personne inconnue a lancé une brique à travers la fenêtre de la salle de bain de la résidence familiale et est ensuite retournée sur les lieux pour crier des insultes à la défenderesse.
[6]
Les défendeurs sont arrivés au Canada le 12 janvier 2013 et ils ont demandé l'asile.
DÉCISION FAISANT L'OBJET DU CONTRÔLE
[7]
La Commission a rendu une décision très brève selon laquelle les défendeurs étaient des réfugiés au sens de la Convention.
[8]
La Commission a conclu que, pour ce qui est de la majeure partie de leur témoignage, y compris celui sur la discrimination qu'ils ont subie de même que tous les actes de violence physique auxquels a été victime leur fils, les défendeurs étaient des victimes crédibles. Cependant, elle n'a pas accepté le témoignage des défendeurs au sujet d'une dernière série d'incidents selon lesquels, d'après les défendeurs, un homme s'était présenté à leur résidence pour les menacer. Les incohérences et les ajustements dans le témoignage ont mené la Commission à conclure que ces incidents n'ont jamais eu lieu et que les défendeurs avaient tenté d'induire la Commission en erreur en ajoutant ces incidents à leur témoignage par ailleurs crédible.
[9]
La Commission a conclu que le nombre incessant et répété d'actes de discrimination dont ont été victimes tous les membres de la famille en raison de leur nationalité, particulièrement le fils qui a été battu, et la discrimination dont a souffert la défenderesse dans sa recherche d'emploi, constituaient de la persécution.
[10]
La Commission a conclu que l'État ne serait pas raisonnablement disposé à protéger la famille dans ce cas précis. Les défendeurs ont tenté à plusieurs reprises d'obtenir la protection des autorités policières et, même si les policiers sont intervenus à chaque occasion, la Commission a conclu qu'ils ont constamment omis de fournir le niveau de protection adéquat à la famille.
[11]
Abordant la question de la possibilité de refuge intérieur (PRI), la Commission a conclu que la preuve documentaire a permis de confirmer qu'il existe de la discrimination contre les Serbes partout en Croatie, et que, selon la prépondérance des probabilités, les défendeurs ne seraient probablement pas en mesure de trouver un emploi rémunéré dans toute la Croatie.
QUESTIONS EN LITIGE
[12]
Les questions en litige dans la présente demande sont les suivantes:
1) L'analyse de la Commission quant à la présence de discrimination équivalent à de la persécution était-elle raisonnable?
2) L'analyse de la Commission à l'égard de la protection de l'État était-elle raisonnable?
3) L'analyse de la Commission relativement à la PRI viable était-elle raisonnable?
NORME DE CONTRÔLE APPLICABLE
[13]
Les conclusions de la Commission relativement à la discrimination, à la protection de l'État et à la PRI sont toutes des questions de fait ou des questions mixtes de fait et de droit, et elles sont toutes susceptibles de contrôle selon la norme de la décision raisonnable (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  par. 53 [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ];
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  par. 19;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  par. 21;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  par. 24).
[14]
Lorsqu'elle procède à l'examen de la décision de la Commission en appliquant la norme de la décision raisonnable, la Cour ne doit intervenir que si la Commission est arrivée à une conclusion qui n'est pas transparente, justifiable et intelligible et qui n'appartient pas aux issues possibles acceptables pouvant se justifier vu l'ensemble de la preuve dont elle disposait (Dunsmuir, par. 47; Canada (Ministre de la Citoyenneté et de l' <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  par. 59).
ANALYSE
Discrimination dont les défendeurs ont été victimes
[15]
Le demandeur reconnaît qu'un demandeur d'asile peut démontrer que la nature cumulative de la discrimination subie équivaut à de la persécution (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  par. 38), cependant, ce n'est pas le cas en l'espèce.
[16]
Je suis d'accord. La reconnaissance de l'effet cumulatif d'actes discriminatoires ne signifie pas qu'un demandeur s'acquittera de son fardeau simplement en alléguant des actes préjudiciables répétés. Comme l'a conclu la Cour d'appel fédérale dans l'affaire
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  par. 45, portant sur la même question de la discrimination cumulative, « peu importe que le demandeur d'asile invoque un seul incident ou sur une série d'événements considérés globalement, il a l'obligation de convaincre la Commission qu'au moment de l'audience, il a raison de craindre d'être persécuté dans le pays à l'égard duquel il cherche la protection ». Tandis que la Cour d'appel fédérale, dans l'affaire
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  par. 3, on a conclu que la ligne de démarcation entre la persécution et la discrimination est [traduction] « difficile à tracer », et que, [traduction] « dans tous les cas, il incombe à la Commission de tirer sa conclusion dans le contexte factuel particulier, en effectuant une analyse minutieuse de la preuve présentée et en soupesant comme il convient les divers éléments de la preuve, et que l'intervention de la présente Cour n'est pas justifiée à moins que la conclusion tirée ne semble arbitraire ou déraisonnable ».
[17]
En l'espèce, la décision de la Commission ne permet pas d'établir qu'une analyse minutieuse a été effectuée ou que l'on a soupesé comme il convient les divers éléments de preuve et, par conséquent, elle est déraisonnable. La conclusion de la Commission selon laquelle « les actes de discrimination incessants et répétés subis par tous les membres de la famille » équivalaient à de la persécution, n'est tout simplement pas conforme à la preuve dont elle dispose. Même si d'après certains éléments de preuve le fils du demandeur a été ostracisé par certains camarades de classe et enfants du voisinage, la conclusion de la Commission quant aux actes de violence physique répétés n'est pas fondée. Dans le formulaire de Fondement de la demande d'asile (FDA) du demandeur, il rapporte seulement un incident de violence physique perpétrée contre son fils. En outre, tandis que la Commission décrit l'incident de 2011 comme celui où un voisin âgé de 15 ans « battait vos enfants », la preuve établit clairement que même si des menaces ont été proférées aucun acte physique n'a été posé. Les actes discriminatoires vécus par le fils du défendeur n'ont été ni approuvés ni encouragés par les autorités étatiques de la Croatie, et le fils a été en mesure de poursuivre ses études, y compris son éducation religieuse, en Croatie. De la même manière, la conclusion de la Commission quant à la présence de discrimination équivalent à de la persécution dans le contexte du milieu de travail n'est pas étayée par la preuve. Contrairement à la conclusion de la Commission selon laquelle la défenderesse n'a pas été en mesure de trouver un emploi pendant de « nombreuses années », un examen des antécédents professionnels incohérents a permis d'établir que, mis à part une courte période entre 2008 et 2009, la défenderesse a pu trouver du travail en Croatie. De même, rien n'indique que le défendeur a eu de la difficulté à se trouver du travail; en fait, il a occupé le même emploi de fossoyeur pendant 16 ans avant de quitter la Croatie. Les conclusions de la Commission n'étaient pas fondées sur la preuve qui lui a été soumise et son analyse de l'effet cumulatif d'actes discriminatoires et de la présence de persécution était inadéquate.
Protection de l'État
[18]
Le demandeur soutient que la Commission a omis d'appliquer les principes juridiques qui gouvernent une analyse de la protection de l'État. En outre, le demandeur fait valoir que les conclusions de la Commission n'ont pas mené à une analyse minutieuse de la preuve, et que cette analyse est quasi inexistante.
[19]
Encore une fois, je suis du même avis. L'analyse de la protection de l'État effectuée par la Commission et son traitement de la preuve soumise étaient entièrement inadéquats. La conclusion de la Commission selon laquelle les policiers « ont constamment échoué à fournir à votre famille un niveau de protection adéquat » n'était pas étayée par la preuve devant elle. Il a été démontré que les policiers ont répondu à chaque appel des défendeurs et rien de permet d'établir que les policiers n'ont pas donné suite à des enquêtes ou qu'ils ont omis de fournir des services. Cela est particulièrement vrai compte tenu de l'absence de rapports de police déposés et du fait que les défendeurs n'ont pas fait de suivi auprès du service de police après d'incident de 2011.
[20]
Les défendeurs ont le fardeau de réfuter la présomption de la protection de l'État (
Canada (Procureur général) c. Ward
, [1993] 2 RCS 689, par. 725 et 726) et ce fardeau est encore plus difficile à renverser dans des États démocratiques comme la Croatie (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  par. 57). L'examen très bref par la Commission de la protection de l'État ne traite d'aucun de ces principes et ne fournit pas une assise raisonnable sur laquelle la Commission aurait pu se prononcer comme elle l'a fait (
Alberta (Information and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  par. 53).
Possibilité de refuge intérieur
[21]
Le critère visant à déterminer si un demandeur dispose d'une PRI viable comporte deux volets. Premièrement, la Commission doit être convaincue qu'il n'y a pas de possibilité sérieuse que le demandeur d'asile soit persécuté dans la PRI envisagée. Deuxièmement, elle doit être convaincue qu'il est objectivement raisonnable de s'attendre à ce que le demandeur cherche refuge dans le lieu désigné comme une PRI (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  au par. 20).
[22]
Le demandeur fait valoir qu'il semble que la Commission ait combiné de façon erronée ces deux volets en un seul critère, concluant donc que la discrimination contre les Serbes est présente dans toute la Croatie, particulièrement pour ce qui est d'obtenir un emploi et que les défendeurs ne pourraient pas trouver un emploi rémunéré dans toute la Croatie. La Commission a également omis de déterminer si une ville de la Croatie située à l'extérieur d'une zone de guerre pouvait être désignée comme une PRI.
[23]
Une fois de plus, je souscris aux arguments soulevés par le demandeur. Le traitement par la Commission de l'exigence d'une PRI était incomplet. La Commission a conclu compte tenu des « compétences limitées et de vos antécédents d'emploi » des défendeurs et selon la prépondérance des probabilités, qu'ils ne seraient pas susceptibles de trouver un emploi rémunéré dans toute la Croatie. En tenant compte à la fois des incohérences soulevées dans le dossier concernant les antécédents professionnels de la défenderesse et de l'absence de preuve démontrant qu'un emploi de fossoyeur, d'homme de ménage ou d'aide à domicile ne pourrait être occupé dans d'autres régions du pays, la conclusion de la Commission n'est pas étayée par la preuve qui lui a été soumise.
CONCLUSION
[24]
Malheureusement pour les défendeurs, la décision de la Commission comporte tellement de lacunes qu'elle ne peut être sauvegardée par le raisonnement de l'arrêt
Newfoundland and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . Comme l'a récemment rappelé la Cour dans l'affaire
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  par. 11, « L'arrêt
Newfoundland Nurses
ne donne pas à la Cour toute la latitude voulue pour fournir des motifs qui n'ont pas été donnés, ni ne l'autorise à deviner quelles conclusions auraient pu être tirées ou à émettre des hypothèses sur ce que le tribunal a pu penser ». En l'espèce, la Commission n'a pas examiné de façon adéquate la preuve qui lui a été soumise, et son analyse ainsi que ses motifs sont si inadéquats qu'ils ne peuvent être considérés comme étant raisonnables.
[25]
Pour ces motifs, j'accueillerais la demande de contrôle judiciaire. L'affaire est renvoyée à un tribunal différemment constitué pour nouvel examen.
JUGEMENT
[26]
LA COUR STATUE QUE
:
La demande de contrôle judiciaire est accueillie et l'affaire est renvoyée à un tribunal différemment constitué pour nouvel examen.
[End of document]