 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (TD)
MLB unedited judgment
Scientific Games Inc. (plaintiff) and Pollard Banknote Limited (defendant)
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
Federal Court of Canada
Trial Division
Hargrave, Prothonotary
May 8, 1997.
(T-2571-93)
Counsel:
Dan Hitchcock, for the plaintiff;
Campbell G. Wright, for the defendant.
Solicitors of Record:
Riches, McKenzie & Herbert, Toronto, Ontario, for the plaintiff;
Buchwald, Asper, Gallagher, Henteleff, Winnipeg, Manitoba, for the defendant.
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary. Any footnotes found in this case will appear below end of document.
[1]
Hargrave, Prothonotary
: These reasons arise out of motions brought by the Plaintiff and by the Defendant, each to require the other to answer questions and produce documents requested during Examinations for Discovery.
BACKGROUND
[2]
The Plaintiff is an American manufacturer of lottery tickets, particularly of the so-called instant win or scratch and win variety. The Plaintiff holds a Canadian patent for a lottery ticket integrity number, being a number on the reverse of the ticket which is algorithmicly related to accounting information on the front of the ticket. It seems that unscrupulous individuals employed by lottery administrations, having access to winning tickets might, after the ticket holder had been paid out, delaminate the ticket, pasting the winning face, composed of aluminum foil, onto the paper back of a ticket made out in their own name and resubmit the ticket.
[3]
Through the Plaintiff's procedure the accounting information on the face of the ticket can be processed by a computer into the algorithmicly related number printed on the reverse of the ticket as the roll of laminated ticket stock is fed through a press which prints the computer controlled information on both sides of the ticket. As I understand it, the permutations and combinations of accounting information produced by this technique are such that even a three character integrity number, composed of letters and figures, would be so complex that the average scoundrel would find he had better things with which to occupy himself than to try to compute a valid integrity number. Abu Ja'far Mohammed Ben Musa, the ninth century mathematician, from whose agnomen the term algorithm is derived, would doubtless be most fascinated by such a worldly application of the casting of numbers.
[4]
Now the Defendant, Pollard Banknote Limited is, among other things, in a similar business of printing instant win lottery tickets, forty-seven types of which the Plaintiff says infringe on its patent process for printing related numbers on the front and back of such tickets. Indeed the Plaintiff contends its patented procedure of printing algorithimicly related numbers is what made the Defendant's lottery tickets a commercial success. The Defendant says its tickets, by reason of its technique and manufacturing process, obviate the need for an integrity number. The Defendant says that not only was the Plaintiff's invention obvious and known prior to the Plaintiff's claim of invention, but that the whole idea had previously been patented in Canada. The Defendant goes on to counterclaim for, among other things, a declaration of invalidity.
[5]
Also at issue in this proceeding is an accounting, which is to be dealt with at trial, rather than by a reference. This leads to requests for various accounting information and the issue of confidentiality for, as a competitor, the Defendant does not wish to disclose its pricing structure.
[6]
The parties, in their material, refer to some 250 undertakings given, questions taken under advisement and refusals to answer or provide material during the course of extensive examinations for discovery of William Behm on behalf of the Plaintiff and Gordon Pollard on behalf of the Defendant.
[7]
I have not set out all of the questions, or the answers given to some and not accepted, for two reasons. First, it would be a massive task, out of all proportion to its usefulness; and second, some of the questions and documents fall within the ambit of a privacy order made to January 1996, and as such have been designated either as confidential, or for counsel's eyes only. Thus various of the outstanding questions and requests are dealt with either generally or, where possible, in groups.
ANSWERS AND MATERIAL REQUESTED BY THE PLAINTIFF
[8]
The answers and material requested by the Plaintiff arise out of the Examination for Discovery of Gordon Pollard, which took place 27 and 28 May 1996. I will deal with the various questions in the order they were presented on the motion, some of which are individual questions and others of which are groups of questions.
[9]
In considering whether material ought to be provided, I have kept in mind the six general principles governing the scope of examination for discovery set out in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at 230. To paraphrase these principles:
1. The test as to production is that of relevancy. Relevancy is a matter of law. Documents which may reasonably be supposed to contain information which may indirectly or directly advance a party's case or damage that of the adversary are relevant;
2. questions that are too general or require an opinion or are outside of the scope of the proceeding need not be answered;
3. the propriety of discovery questions relates to the facts set out in the statement of claim, or the defense, as the case may be, rather than to any facts which a party proposes to prove;
4. answers should not be required to questions which, while they might be relevant, are not likely to advance in any way the questioning party's legal position;
5. the court, before requiring a discovery question be answered, must weigh the probable usefulness of the answer against the time, trouble and difficulty involved in obtaining the answer for one must look at what is reasonable and fair under the circumstances; and
6. fishing expeditions in the nature of vague, far reaching or irrelevant lines of questioning are to be discouraged.
[10]
I have also kept in mind that notwithstanding general statements as to the broad right on examination for discovery to fully explore issues raised by the pleadings, to determine and understand the position of the party being examined and to gain admissions in order to narrow issues and reduce matters to be determined at trial, there are limits on the ambit of examination for discovery. For example, a court will not permit discovery to be used as a fishing expedition. A court will only require a party to deal with the question within its knowledge or about which it has the ability to find an answer: see for example
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at 130 and following (F.C.A.).
[11]
Finally, counsel at various points during the motion referred to specific cases. Subsequently counsel for the plaintiff provided a letter containing some written argument and case material. Counsel for the Defendant has more recently provided similar material. I will refer to the additional material when it applies to any particular line of questions.
Question 831, Page 273
[12]
Counsel for the Plaintiff seeks a copy of one or more of the Defendant's invoices to a customer both so Plaintiff's counsel might refer to it from time to time and for use to obtain instruction from and verification of costs by his client. From the present edited invoices it is impossible to relate an invoice to any of the forty-seven lottery games or types of tickets: the forty-seven tickets and the forty-seven invoices cannot be matched.
[13]
Counsel for the Defendant agrees such documents may be relevant and producible, but balks at his client giving unrestricted access to confidential business information. The Defendant has therefore supplied an edited copy of the invoice. Plaintiff's counsel's difficulty with the edited invoice is that the invoice for a given type of lottery ticket cannot be matched to the sale and production costs. Counsel for the Defendant proposes to show but not to give counsel for the plaintiff an unedited invoice.
[14]
Mr. Justice Hugessen, dealing with an analogous situation in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.) which, at that stage, involved production of documents for a reference as to profits, remarked:
"One of the principal questions on the reference will be to know what part of the profit realized from those sales must be accounted for. Another question, equally important, will be to determine the amount of such profit. In answering those questions the court must be conscious that it is the defendant's wrongdoing which has made the present litigation necessary and that neither the court nor the plaintiff are obliged to accept, at face value, the defendant's assertions as to its revenues and costs. On the other hand, the defendant, like any litigant, is entitled to be protected by the court from abusive and unnecessary intrusions into its private affairs." (Page 118.)
[15]
It is perhaps unfortunate that production costs and profits are subjects of examination at this stage, with liability still at issue, and not the subject of a reference after establishment of liability. There is a middle course, between unrestricted production and the present suggestion that Plaintiff's counsel look at but not take away unedited invoice material, a procedure that might allow the Plaintiff material by which to explore and calculate damages, but will not intrude unnecessarily into the Defendant's private business affairs. Defendant's counsel shall provide Plaintiff's counsel with the required invoice material. Plaintiff's counsel may discuss such with his client, but shall not allow it or the information contained on it to be copied for or by his client or otherwise provided to his client.
Questions 847, 848 and 849, Page 284
[16]
Counsel for the Plaintiff asks for the specification sheets or working papers for each of the tickets. Counsel for the Defendant objects on the basis, to paraphrase a substantial argument, that at issue are profits, being merely revenue less expense. Plaintiff's counsel counters that they are necessary for two reasons: first, to show the sale price; and second, to establish whether a characteristic required by the specification is an integrity number. Also relevant is the fact that the Defendant seeks similar material from the Plaintiff, questions 828 and 829 of the Discovery of Mr. Behm
[17]
Counsel for the Plaintiff also seeks any documents, other than specification sheets, which might show the type of ticket and the quantity sold. This is said to be relevant in order to determine the revenue generated upon the Defendant's allegedly infringing tickets.
[18]
Given that the specification sheets apparently show a price and the characteristics of the tickets, they and any analogous documents are relevant and producible.
Question 861, Page 291
[19]
Here the Plaintiff seeks production of material showing warehousing charges, being $5,000.00 per month for ticket storage. This is a figure not reflected on ticket invoices. The Plaintiff says this material is relevant and producible as part of the Defendant's obligation to account for revenue, of which storage revenue is a part.
[20]
Counsel for the Defendant says revenue has been accounted for and has been explained as monthly invoicing to Western Canada Lottery Corporation. Counsel for the Defendant also says that storage charges are not allocated to specific tickets, but that they would be prepared to supply a copy of the invoice for inspection by the Plaintiff's solicitor.
[21]
There is some suggestion that storage may be revenue generated by a subsidiary, but counsel for the Plaintiff believes the revenue is not to a subsidiary, that this question should be cleared up, and further that production of the storage invoices may lead to a train of enquiry.
[22]
In the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case (
supra
), a part of the accounting involved the after-sale provision of parts and services (see pages 119 and 120). The Court of Appeal determined this to be relevant enquiry. It is analogous to the storage charges in the present instance. Touching briefly on the point made by counsel for the Defendant, that an accounting does not include revenue generated by a subsidiary which is not a party, that may be true enough. However, the Court of Appeal did allow exploration of the area where the defendant owned a portion of the subsidiary and thereby realized a profit. In the present instance, there does not appear to be evidence of a subsidiary, but if there is, that point and the benefit received by the Defendant ought to be explored. The Defendant will provide the required material.
Question 997, page 342
[23]
At issue at this point during Mr. Pollard's Discovery are overhead items including, heat, rent, property taxes, floor space in the plant and management cost. The Plaintiff wishes to explore a factory overhead portion, for work centres or cost centres, which it characterizes as fixed costs not directly attributed to the manufacturer of a given set of tickets. The argument here is that it is not a deduction which ought to be included to arrive at a profit figure. In effect, it is a fixed/variable cost argument for the Plaintiff says the Defendant must disclose its revenue, its direct expense and any increases in fixed costs attributable to the manufacture of a specific set of tickets.
[24]
The Plaintiff's argument is logical. However, the question asked of the witness was whether "...that overhead cost is not directly attributed to the manufacture of these tickets?" (Question 997). Counsel for the Defendant characterizes this as calling for a legal conclusion or calling for expert evidence.
[25]
I take this question to deal with the make up of an overhead figure. It is an accounting exercise in part. But it also calls for a legal opinion as to whether heat, rent, taxes, management and the like can be overhead which might be directly attributable to the manufacture of the tickets in question. It might have been possible to break down and rephrase the question to make it acceptable, but as asked it calls, at least in part, for a legal opinion, not on a factual matter, but as an interpretation of a definition.
[26]
Ordinarily opinion evidence cannot be obtained on examination for discovery. Nor is a party entitled to obtain an expert opinion on an examination for discovery. This question need not be answered.
Questions 1323 at pages 478 and 479
[27]
Counsel for the Plaintiff seeks disclosure of the labour component, separated from factory overhead cost, for each of the forty-seven tickets.
[28]
Counsel for the Defendant went so far as to agree to give a break down for a specific ticket, explain how it was arrived out and then permit Plaintiff's counsel and their accountants to attend at the factory in Winnipeg to verify that the given numbers for the other forty-six tickets have been correctly arrived at.
[29]
Discovery is not to obtain disclosure of intended evidence, but rather the facts relevant to the pleadings: see for example
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at 120. The Defendant has gone sufficiently far in offering to explain the calculation for one ticket and by agreeing to allow Plaintiff's counsel and an accountant to verify other figures. To go further, to work up calculations for each of the forty-seven tickets, is a matter of evidence that the Defendant might or might not produce. It is not required. The Plaintiff can as well have an accountant attend and derive the figures for itself. Moreover, there is the matter of weighing the usefulness of the material against the inconvenience and expense of putting it together and computing the figures the Plaintiff seeks: the balance is in favour of the Defendant's position. The material will not be required so long as there is reasonable access at the Defendant's facility.
Question 1327, page 481
[30]
The Plaintiff seeks a breakdown of revenue for the years 1993, 1994 and 1995, notwithstanding the claims are for particular lottery tickets, on the basis that on an accounting of profits the Plaintiff would be entitled to compound interest. The Defendant says it has responded by providing the approximate dates of receipt of revenue and the relevant interest rates. However, the Plaintiff seeks what it calls a clean figure for each year upon which to compound interest.
[31]
The Plaintiff, in essence, requires the Defendant to work out calculations, using figures in material already provided by the Defendant to the Plaintiff. It would be an abuse of process to require an examined party to expend time and effort to produce material it has already within the knowledge of the examining party, thus relieving that party of having to do the necessary research itself: see for example
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at 118 (F.C.). This is a situation in which the answer may be useful to the Plaintiff, but the Defendant ought not to be put to the inconvenience and expense of working out answers which the Plaintiff can compute as easily and likely as accurately. The Defendant need not provide the requested material.
Question 1284, page 461
[32]
The Plaintiff seeks to have the Defendant match the forty-seven lottery ticket types to certain financial summaries. It requests this match first, because some tickets may infringe and others may not, and second, to assess whether the figures provided by the Defendant are reasonable. This material may, in the Plaintiff's view, lead to a train of enquiry as to the Defendant's true revenue.
[33]
The Defendant feels the material contains highly sensitive information which the Plaintiff might use to bid against the Defendant on future jobs. The Defendant says it will provide the material on the strict condition that it be for the use of counsel and experts only. The Defendant will allow access to revenue and expense figures so an expert may verify figures, and while denying that the match between tickets and sales figures is relevant, it is prepared to provide a match if the material is given a similar confidentiality status.
[34]
Confidentiality orders are designed to balance the openness of court with
bona fide
commercial and proprietary interests. Generally the courts shy away from granting such orders for "...such orders always go against the constitutional imperative of an open court, including public access to the court's record and against the court's very nature as a superior court of record...":
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at 439. In the present instance the parties already have a confidentiality order, setting up various categories of documents and must now live with it. An order preventing counsel from showing evidence to a client, in order to obtain instructions, while not unknown, should only be granted in very unusual circumstances: see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.) which was applied by Mr. Justice Cullen in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at 179. Indeed, the burden on a party requesting such an order is heavy.
[35]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  and support staff from having access to certain information, for there was no evidence that the in-house expert, with whom counsel wished to consult, was untrustworthy.
[36]
In the present instance, the question is whether there are very unusual circumstances which might justify such an Order
.
Counsel for the Plaintiff submits it is pure speculation that the Plaintiff would use the information in the material in its bidding process. That may, in a highly competitive business, be a somewhat naive view.
[37]
The Defendant, for its part, suggests access be limited to counsel and an expert. Counsel for the Plaintiff says such would be of no help to him as he wishes to check the reasonableness of the figures and therefore needs not expert opinion, but industry knowledge. An expert need not be an accountant and might be someone from industry. However, to allow an outside expert from the industry, to review the figures, might be just as damaging to the Defendant as a review by the Plaintiff. I would be much happier denying such confidentiality were liability already established and the issue was disclosure for the purposes of a reference as to damages or profit.
[38]
On balance, while the Defendant may in good faith believe its commercial competitive interests would be compromised by disclosing this material, it has provided no hard evidence to show that narrow in-house disclosure would necessarily be to some untrustworthy person who would not abide by the Court's Disclosure Order. In addition, the Defendant has not shown that the material is of a higher order of confidentiality than either much other corporate material in a competitive business environment or the material covered by the 2 January 1996 confidentiality order of Associate Senior Prothonotary Giles. The circumstances and situation are just not that unusual.
[39]
The material shall be disclosed for the eyes of counsel and to those individuals as provided for in Mr. Giles' confidentiality order, all of the terms of which shall apply.
Question 1202, page 417
[40]
The Plaintiff requests unedited copies of the cost report summaries for lottery game tickets one through forty-seven. Again these business records are relevant and producible. Indeed, counsel for the Defendant says they may be inspected any time at the Defendant's Winnipeg premises. Counsel for the Plaintiff wishes copies to consider at his leisure and from time to time at a later date.
[41]
To require counsel to attend in Winnipeg each time he wishes to consider the material is unsatisfactory. The material will be produced on the same terms as that called for under
Question 1284, referred to immediately above.
Question 1275, page 452
[42]
The Plaintiff asks the Defendant to provide copies of lottery tickets made by competitors, in Canada, which may infringe the Plaintiff's patent. The Defendant says it has been singled out from other Canadian manufacturers of similar tickets by the Plaintiff and sued by reason of a refusal of access to the Plaintiff of a patent held by the Defendant. The Plaintiff's view is that if there are third parties producing infringing lottery tickets and the Plaintiff is ignoring them, that might be a factor in denying the Plaintiff equitable relief by way of an accounting of profits.
[43]
The Discovery transcript material does not establish with any certainty whether the Defendant has such material. But in any event, it falls into the category in which the usefulness of the material is outweighed by the inconvenience and expense of having the Defendant look for, assess and produce specimens of competitors' lottery tickets. The material need not be produced.
Questions 1300, 1335, 1336 and 1337, pages 468, 486 and 487
[44]
This group of questions involves tickets made by Pollard Bank Note BC Ltd., a subsidiary, which billed its portion of any work to the Defendant, Pollard Bank Note Limited. The latter then sold the tickets to its customers. The Plaintiff asks whether any profit was made or revenue received by Pollard Bank Note BC Ltd. from the manufacture or sale to the Defendant of the forty-seven ticket types or games. In addition, the Plaintiff wishes to know whether Pollard Bank Note BC Ltd. paid any dividends to its parent as a result of the manufacture of the forty-seven games. The Defendant has refused to provide this information, as Pollard Bank Note BC Ltd. is not a party.
[45]
Both counsel refer to
"
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Valmet Dominion Inc., which had been sued separately, the Court of Appeal had very much in mind that the defendant's wrongdoing had already been established. I would again refer to the passage quoted earlier from that case at page 118. In essence, while a plaintiff has certain rights, the private affairs of a defendant are to be protected from unnecessary abuse and intrusion.
[46]
The Court of Appeal in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> noted, in principle, that a patentee whose rights have been infringed, should recover all of the profit, direct and indirect, obtained from the wrongful infringement (page 119). More specifically, "profits realized by the defendant through subsidiaries or related companies, including but not limited to any royalties paid to the defendant by the latter, must be accounted for." (Page 121). One must be certain to distinguish between the profits from a subsidiary and the profits of a subsidiary. Certainly dividends, if any, received from Pollard Bank Note BC Ltd. by Pollard Bank Note Limited are relevant and must be brought into the accounting: thus question 1337 must be answered. However, if the Plaintiff wishes to determine profits made by a subsidiary of the Defendant, it ought to sue the subsidiary, for in the present instance we are concerned only with profits made by the Defendant. This profit is accounted for by any relevant dividends received, and by the net return on the spread between Pollard Bank Note Limited's purchase price from its subsidiary and its sale price to its customer. To go further and request financial information of an entity, which is not a party, falls within the category of an abuse of and unnecessary intrusion into private affairs. Thus questions 1300, 1335 and 1336 need not be answered.
Questions 1302, 1303 and 1304, pages 469 and 470
[47]
By these questions the Plaintiff seeks to know whether the Defendant has received financial assistance, subsidy or low interest loan benefits from any government. The Court of Appeal, in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> (
supra
) at page 121, acknowledged that subsidies may, depending upon the circumstances and the way in which the questions are phrased, have to be brought into an accounting of profits.
[48]
The three questions asked of the Defendant's witness are straightforward. They require answers. Of course any follow up questions must be proper ones.
Questions 1307, 1308 and 1310, pages 471 and 472
[49]
Questions 1307, 1308 and 1310 deal with indirect revenue by way of related sales, consultation services or as part of any larger overall orders to supply lottery tickets. The Court of Appeal, in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , (
supra
) dealt with a similar question in the context of profits earned by Valmet Oy on the sales of non-infringing parts incorporated into an infringing machine: the Court of Appeal looked upon this issue as a difficult question of fact, but one that would have to be dealt with by the trial judge who had been appointed as referee. To make that determination, the referee would need such information.
[50]
In the present instance the questions are clear enough, however the objection is that the reasons of a purchaser, for buying additional tickets, or consulting services, is not within the knowledge of Pollard Bank Note Limited and thus would be a speculative answer.
[51]
Question 1307, which asks whether any additional tickets were sold because of the sale of infringing tickets, is a very different sort of question from whether non-infringing parts were sold to be incorporated into infringing machines. The question would require too much speculation. It need not be answered.
[52]
Question 1308 asks whether consulting services were provided as a result of the sale of infringing tickets. To the extent of any packages of tickets and consultation, or consultation directly resulting from the sale of infringing tickets, the question must be answered.
[53]
The wording of Question 1310 is important:
"Were any of the tickets identified as games 1 to 47 in the summary sold pursuant to a larger contract or order to supply lottery tickets?"
I fail to see the relevance of this question, as it is asked. Further, if the question is whether infringing tickets were sold because there was a larger order, that would be mere speculation on the part of Pollard Bank Note Limited. Question 1310 need not be answered.
Question 1311, page 472
[54]
The Plaintiff wishes copies of any contracts or orders, to supply lottery tickets, which included tickets 1 through 47, together with other lottery tickets. This question differs from question 1310 in that it does not require any speculation on the part of Pollard Bank Note Limited. However, the relevance of the material is suspect. The Defendant need not produce the requested material.
Question 1204, page 425
[55]
At Question 1204 counsel asks Mr. Pollard whether he has any facts to suggest that if one ticket were to be found to infringe, not all the other forty-six tickets would infringe.
[56]
To begin, this is not pleaded in the defence. However, the objection taken by counsel is that the Defendant does not have particulars of the infringement from the Plaintiff. It is not prepared to answer the question or give any undertaking until he has explored the area during the discovery of the Plaintiff, at which point, once the Defendant knows the case it must meet, counsel will advise.
[57]
At this point the question is both premature and irrelevant. However one would expect that if the Defendant takes the position that only some of the forty-seven tickets infringe, there should be further discovery on that point.
Integrity Numbers and Check Digits
[58]
Beginning at page 444, counsel discuss the purpose of the integrity number as a security device to detect delamination, and whether the numbers on the Defendant's tickets serve that function or not, for in the latter instance such numbers would therefore have no value. This leads to Question 1259 as to the purpose of the check digit and validation number on the Defendant's tickets, if it is not used to protect the integrity of the ticket.
Question 1259, Page 449
[59]
Counsel for the Defendant objects to this question on the basis that the area was explored in an initial examination a year previously, and that the question as posed is neither a follow up question, nor does it arise out of subsequently produced documents. The original question had been whether Pollard Bank Note's check digit served the same purpose as an integrity number. The answer was apparently that the purpose of the check digit was not to prevent delamination. Counsel for the Defendant then submits that counsel for the Plaintiff ought not to be able to ask, on further examination, as to the purpose of the check digit, for that amounts to cross-examination. Indeed, "...examination for discovery is not intended to take the place of cross-examination at the trial...":
Pearlman v.National Life Assurance Company of Canada
(1917) 39 O.L.R. 141 at 143.
[60]
The question, from one point of view, borders on a fishing expedition, rather than an attempt to limit, define or clarify the real issues between the parties. But discovery is also broad in order to help to ensure evidence is unearthed at an early stage so as to avoid concealment, surprise and wasted time at trial. It may be that the purpose of the Defendant's check digits on its tickets has no relevance in this litigation, but now is the time to find out. Gordon D. Cudmore, in
Choat on Discovery
, referring to
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  time, can never produce harm. If the intended evidence is true, its early disclosure can only serve justice. It may weaken, or overcome, the opposing party's case and contribute to the better administration of justice. This must be so even with recognition that a thoroughly unscrupulous opponent could possibly abuse that prior knowledge." (Page 1-10 of the second edition).
The Defendant will advise as to the purpose of the check digit and validation number on its ticket.
Question 1539, Page 556
[61]
At this point during Mr. Pollard's discovery, counsel asks what the features are of the Pollard tickets which either prevent delamination or allow delamination to be detected. The Plaintiff, in its written submission, refers to an integrity number. Counsel for the Defendant refers to a validation number on the ticket underneath the scratch off portion. The Plaintiff's written argument on the point is that:
"If the Defendant says that its "such integrity number" was not used to secure the physical integrity of the tickets, then how does the Defendant protect the physical integrity or secure the physical integrity of the tickets. If the Defendant does not secure the physical integrity by any other means, that suggests that the "integrity number" on the Defendant's tickets is in fact being used to secure the physical integrity of the tickets."
[62]
One of the difficulties the witness has with this question is he believes there is no way of delaminating a Pollard Bank Note ticket by reason of the bar code on the ticket and the procedure used by the retail clerk in scanning the bar code and putting the information on the ticket into the system, for once that is done, it is the end of the ticket. All of this is fairly apparently in reading the half dozen pages of transcript leading up to Question 1539. In short, it appears that delamination is not a problem with the Pollard Bank Note tickets and the instant validation system. Thus the witness would have to speculate to a greater extent than he has already done in dealing with this question. The Defendant need not produce a further answer.
Questions 1597 through 1601, Pages 585 and 586
[63]
This group of questions deals with the function of the Plaintiff's integrity number, the Defendant's check digit, whether a validation number that is algorithmicly linked to a book number, a ticket number, and a product and game number, perform the same function as an integrity number, whether the patent relates to a printing system and whether there are any other facts to establish that the Defendant's check sum digit is not an integrity number as referred to in the Plaintiff's patent.
[64]
Question 1597 is a follow up on an earlier discovery question in which Plaintiff's counsel referred to a number on the front of a ticket and asked whether it was an integrity number as Pollard Bank Note Limited understood the term. The answer, in part, was that the number was not an integrity number and that "Pollard Bank Note does not have in its ticket design any number that it calls an integrity number or that performs the same function as it understands the plaintiff's integrity number performs...". This leads to the follow up question as to the Defendant's understanding of the function of an integrity number. Counsel for the Defendant objects, saying the witness is being asked for an interpretation of the word as used in the patent. Counsel for the Plaintiff asks for an interpretation of the term as used by Mr. Pollard in his statement. That is a proper question.
[65]
The follow up, Question 1598, is whether a check digit would not perform the same function as an integrity number. Admissions on examination for discovery must arise from facts, not opinions. This is the realm of experts, not that of an opposing party on discovery: see for example
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Question 1599, whether a validation number algorithmicly linked to a book number, ticket number and product and game number not perform the same function as an integrity number.
[66]
Question 1600 is a follow up on an earlier question asking for "...any facts to support the position that a check sum digit is not an integrity number, as discussed in the patent?". The witness responded to the effect that the answer turned on an interpretation of the patent which, on its face, seemed to relate to a printing system used by Scientific Games. Question 1601 is whether the Defendant has any facts that a check sum number is not an integrity number as discussed in the patent.
[67]
All of this is too close to an opinion and to an interpretation of the patent, which is outside the range of discovery. Questions 1598 through 1601 need not be answered.
Questions 1276, 1284, 1287 and 1354
, Pages 453, 459, 462 and 501
[68]
This group of questions relates to the fact that the Defendant still produces tickets with a check digit on the front and a book number, ticket number and product game number on the reverse. The plaintiff also seeks continuing production of newly prepared documents.
[69]
The Defendant, by supplemental affidavit, produced documents up to 29 April 1996. The Plaintiff now wishes copies of current tickets and confirmation that they are on laminated stock with an integrity number or an algorithmicly linked number on the front and back.
[70]
The Plaintiff's position is that these questions go to the extent of the alleged infringement and whether the activity continues, which may be relevant to a permanent injunction. Counsel for the Defendant has several objections to these questions, including that they are not proper follow up questions from the earlier examination for discovery, and that at some point production of documents and discovery must come to an end.
[71]
The transcript indicates that Plaintiff's counsel subsequently broke Question 1276 down into shorter and more easily understood questions, to which he received answers. Question 1276 need not be answered.
[72]
At Question 1284 counsel asks for copies of tickets manufactured since 23 January 1996. Question 1354 is similar. This points to a difficulty that may ensue when a plaintiff opts to deal with continuing damages at trial, rather than establishing liability at trial and then, if successful, computing damages on a reference, a course the Defendant advocates. As it is, production of documents and discoveries could go on indefinitely so long as Pollard Bank Note Limited continues to produce allegedly infringing lottery tickets.
[73]
From the transcript it is apparent that counsel for the Defendant has tried to reach an accommodation by suggesting that both sides agree to a cut off date for production of newly produced documents, a reasonable idea, for whether there are forty-seven similar tickets, or a few more similar tickets, makes no difference to liability.
[74]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , Mr. Justice Rouleau dealt with a similar problem, that of bringing examination for discovery to a timely conclusion:
"Discovery is not a never ending process that knows no boundaries. Rather, it is a tool enabling a party to better prepare for trial. However, like any other tool, it has to be properly used in order to give the best results. In this case, allowing the Defendant to continue with the discovery of the Plaintiffs wold unduly delay this action. As such, the interest of justice, as well as the interest of both parties, do not favour granting this motion." (p. 128)
[75]
This is an apt solution in the present instance. Such newly prepared documents need not be produced. Of course, relevant newly discovered documents shall be disclosed in the usual way pursuant to Rule 451.
[76]
It is clear from the transcript that Question 1287 is not a follow up question and therefore need not be answered.
Questions 1494, 1498 and 1504, Pages 535, 537 and 538
[77]
At Question 1494 the Plaintiff asks the Defendant to determine, from Western Canada Lottery Corporation, why it designed its ticket in a certain way. While a person being examined for discovery is required to inform himself by obtaining information from agents and employees, he or she is not required to obtain information from persons who neither parties to the action, nor from those over whom they have no control: see for example
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at pages 94 and 95 (Sask. K.B.). Similarly, Question 1504 need not be answered.
[78]
As to question 1498, the Defendant will identify which one of the forty-seven game tickets, set out on the summary marked as Exhibit O, corresponds to the Cash In a Flash ticket, of course that information to be governed by the Protective Order which is in force.
Questions 1559 through 1561, Pages 564 and 565
[79]
These questions deal with the difference between a mapping algorithm and a standard DES encryption algorithm. Counsel for the Plaintiff was unable to explain the meaning of "DES" or even the relevance of the question. These questions involve an interpretation of the patent and opinion. They are not to be explored here, but if the issue is relevant I expect the Plaintiff will provide expert affidavit material in due course.
Questions 1602 and 1603, Page 587
[80]
At the earlier discovery Mr. Pollard was asked about his position that a cheque sum digit is not an integrity number as discussed in the patent. His response was to the effect that it depended upon the interpretation of the patent which, on the face of it, seemed to Mr. Pollard to relate to a printing system used by the Plaintiff. By way of follow up questions, counsel for the Plaintiff asks why the patent appears to relate to a printing system, and more specifically why the process appears to the Defendant to be a dual pass printing system. Notwithstanding that the Defendant has referred to the dual pass printing technique in its defence, counsel takes the position that it is a matter of expert evidence, requiring the interpretation of the patent.
[81]
The better view is that the Plaintiff is looking for a factual answer as to what leads the Defendant to the conclusion. While it may be that the Defendant will later provide expert affidavit opinion on this point, the Plaintiff is entitled to a factual answer even if it does nothing more than to focus on that part of the patent which leads the Defendant to this conclusion.
ANSWERS AND MATERIAL REQUESTED BY THE DEFENDANT
[82]
The Defendant requests answers to questions and provision of material set out in six schedules to the affidavit of Mr. Gordon Pollard sworn 3 January 1997. Counsel agreed, before the motion came on for hearing, that the Plaintiff would, before the hearing concluded, review the questions asked and documents requested in the two schedules arising out of the examinations for discovery 29, 30 and 31 May 1996 and 16 and 17 October 1996, which are attached as Exhibits A and B to the Pollard affidavit, with a view to agreeing on some items. Thus these reasons begin with consideration of the information and material sought under the third schedule, Exhibit C.
Question 12, Pages 4 through 8
[83]
Counsel for the Defendant tries at this point to determine upon what date of invention the Plaintiff relies. The Plaintiff is overly coy, saying that if it is not going to rely on the priority date, it will advise and then the Defendant might examine further, but then goes on to deny that the discovery of the Plaintiff remains open until the Plaintiff opts on a date. This sort of nonsense tends to defeat the whole purpose of examination for discovery.
[84]
The priority date according to the patent is 11 July 1986. The Plaintiff will produce all documents that reflect the priority date, including the application made in the United States which the Plaintiff says gives it the right to claim a priority date of 11 July 1986.
Question 22, Page 10
[85]
Mr. Behm, a representative of the Defendant, is apparently also the inventor of the patent. He assigned the patent to a Scientific Games Inc., but that particular company is not the Plaintiff. The witness thinks that the Plaintiff is incorporated in Delaware, but does not recall where the assignee, Scientific Games Inc., is incorporated. The Defendant would like copies of the certificates of incorporation of each.
[86]
In its statement of claim the Plaintiff says the Defendant has infringed the Plaintiff's exclusive rights. Yet the representative of the Plaintiff, on discovery, says it assigned the rights to the invention to Scientific Games Inc., a company other than the Plaintiff.
[87]
At the very least all of this is confusing. Examination for discovery is to fully explore issues raised by the pleadings, to determine and understand the opposing party's position and to narrow issues and reduce matters so they may be more effectively and economically determined at trial. The Plaintiff will produce the certificates of incorporation.
Question 38, Page 14
[88]
Question 38 involves the relationship of one Mr. Martin Keane, who was apparently one of two other co-inventors, along with Mr. Behm, of the patent. Counsel for the Defendant submits he is entitled to explore the relationship of Mr. Keane to the company and the interest of Mr. Keane, as a witness, in the Plaintiff company. To this end the Defendant wishes production of any consultancy agreements between the Plaintiff and Mr. Keane.
[89]
Certainly, the names and addresses of witnesses must be given, but it is not appropriate that the party being examined answer questions as to the evidence of a witness. However the matter does not end there for while questions on evidence to be led are out of bounds, the witness may be questioned to compel disclosure of facts relevant to issues in dispute. Consultancy agreements, between Mr. Keane and the Plaintiff, if they exist and if they show the interest of Mr. Keane in the Plaintiff company, have no relevancy to the pleadings, nor are they likely to advance the Defendant's legal position. The Plaintiff need not produce any consultancy agreements which it has with Mr. Keane.
Question 103, Page 29
[90]
Question 103, which is the culmination of various questions dealing with the characteristics of tickets sold by the Plaintiff in Canada, seeks to have the Plaintiff identify and produce copies of any of those instant scratch and win lottery tickets. The Plaintiff says this is relevant in order to explore the development of the instant win ticket, the mischief that was encountered, particularly the delamination problem, the state of the art at the time, the obviousness of the solution and the value of the solution.
[91]
At the time of the discovery counsel objected, saying the Plaintiff would have to dig through archival records to see if such existed. In addition, the Plaintiff says identifying the tickets would have no relevance.
[92]
The purposes for which the Defendant requires the identity of tickets and production of samples has many aspects that may well be relevant. However I must weigh the usefulness of the material against the inconvenience and expense of obtaining it. In addition, when this is fairly evenly balanced, the benefit of the doubt should be in favour of answering any question or providing material: see for example
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.) at 139. In this instance the plaintiff will make reasonable efforts to identify the tickets and to provide any samples it may have.
Questions 183 to 186, Pages 57 and 58
[93]
In this series of questions counsel for the Defendant asks the witness where the term "integrity number" came from. The Defendant submits that this is relevant as it may show prior use or obviousness.
[94]
An answer to this question may well advance the Defendant's response to this claim. To the extent that the Plaintiff is able to determine the provenance or source of the term, the question is to be answered.
Question 253, Pages 78 and 79
[95]
Up until about 1980 the conventional printing of lottery tickets placed data on the front of a ticket, which included a validation number, a book and ticket number and inventory or accounting information which were algorithmicly linked. In about 1980 or 1981, a fraud, with an internal source, was perpetuated on the State of Pennsylvania Lottery. In response to that occurrence and at the request of the State of Pennsylvania, the witness for the Plaintiff says that it developed an ability to print tickets with information on both sides, moving the accounting or inventory information from the front to the back of the tickets making it more difficult to perpetuate such a fraud. The witness believes there is a file, kept by the Plaintiff's predecessor, containing information about the Pennsylvania Lottery Commission problem. The Defendant asks for the production of that file.
[96]
The Defendant's position is that the file will show the state of the art, the nature of the mischief, and whether it was a delamination problem, and if that is the case the file is relevant. Moreover, the Defendant points out that the witness refers to a number on the Pennsylvania lottery ticket as a validation number and that is the same terminology the Defendant uses for its number.
[97]
The Defendant has made a case for the relevance of the material. Again I must balance the utility of the information against the trouble and difficulty of the Plaintiff searching out a file originating in about 1981. The witness for the Plaintiff has referred to the incident as a "very famous scandal" involving an on-line lottery game which was rigged by an employee of a television station and someone from the security department of the Pennsylvania Lottery Commission. Thus it is not any routine and ordinary file. The utility outweighs the time and trouble of a reasonable search. The Plaintiff will make reasonable efforts to discover and produce the file.
Question 262, Pages 81 and 82
[98]
On this exchange counsel for the Defendant requests any résumés that have been made by the company about the witness, Mr. Behm. The request for production arises out Mr. Behm's inability to recall his title or position when he joined the Plaintiff company, and of which he is now Executive Vice President. Mr. Behm acknowledges that there is a résumé contained in the Plaintiff's bids although it does not set out in detail what he was doing when he joined the company.
[99]
The Defendant's rationale is that with the résumé it will know the witness better and perhaps determine the value to be ascribed to the invention in a sense of whether or not the invention appears on the résumé. The Defendant's response is that the résumé is not relevant, that the Defendant could have explored this on discovery, and further that it is a fishing expedition. This is rather a vague and far reaching approach on the part of the Defendant. It does not seem particularly relevant in this instance. The résumé need not be produced.
Question 270, Page 83
[100]
At Question 270 on page 83 the Defendant seeks production of all files in which the Plaintiff dealt with the request from the Pennsylvania Lottery Commission that the Plaintiff incorporate different features in its tickets and the way in which the request might be fulfilled, including the ultimate decision to put the book and ticket number on the reverse. The Defendant submits this was relevant to show the state of the art, to illustrate what was happening in the lottery managing and ticketing world and to determine the scope of the patent. The Plaintiff submits all of this happened in 1981 and was not relevant in 1986.
[101]
To summarize the evidence of the Plaintiff's witness, Mr. Behm, at pages 77 and following, it was the Pennsylvania Lottery Commission enquiry that was the impetus to the solution. The Defendant has pleaded the state of the art in the years 1962 through 1974, obviousness and public knowledge by way of an American patent filed in 1985. The requested material may well contain information which may indirectly or directly damage the Plaintiff's case. The material is thus relevant and will be produced.
Question 511, Pages 143 and 144
[102]
At Question 511 on page 143 and 144 of the transcript, counsel for the Defendant requests, under appropriate terms of confidentiality, information as to the volume of business that the Plaintiff has had in making and selling instant lottery tickets that used integrity numbers from the time of the first use of integrity numbers to the present. The Defendant's submissions are that this information is relevant on the basis of obviousness, which is the counterpart to commercial success and the value of the invention, for if there is an infringement by the Defendant, the Plaintiff ought only to be entitled to the value of the patent that is incorporated into the ticket. This line of reasoning concludes with the idea that there may be no value at all in having an integrity number given the present state of the art of running lotteries.
[103]
The Plaintiff's submission was that since the Plaintiff does not rely on commercial success, sales are irrelevant. At this point I requested that the Plaintiff make an election as to reliance on commercial success before deciding this question. The election, by letter of 7 April 1997, is in fact the reverse: the Plaintiff will indeed be relying upon the concept of commercial success.
[104]
The transcript of the discovery of Mr. Behm, at page 144, contains an objection, by counsel for the Plaintiff that, "Other than by way of commercial success, how does that relate to obviousness?" This comment and the advice that the Plaintiff will indeed rely upon commercial success, provide the answer to production. The information is relevant and will be produced.
[105]
The Plaintiff has agreed to answer Question 516 at page 145.
Questions 538 and 539, Page 152
[106]
At Questions 538 and 539, at page 152 of the transcript, the witness refers to customer concerns over the delamination or splitting of tickets and that the Plaintiff was searching for a solution. Counsel then asked when that customer concern was first presented and that if it was communicated in writing or in any fashion, the Plaintiff then look for and produce such communications and any responses.
[107]
The Defendant says the time at when the ticket delamination problem arose and its solutions go to the scope of the claim, to obviousness and to what someone might pay for a solution, that is to the value. It is also said to touch on the state of the art and the validity of the patent. The Plaintiff's submission is essentially that the timing and content of this communication has nothing to do with any of these points.
[108]
This question is similar to Question 253, dealing with the problem and the solution. The material will therefore be produced.
Questions 552 through 557, Pages 158 and 159
[109]
Leading up to this series of questions, the witness has explained that when presented with a problem one begins to develop possible solutions. In this particular instance the problem was a concern about delamination and splitting of lottery tickets. At Question 552, counsel for the Defendant asks whether any notes were kept, minutes made or reports issued arising out of these meetings, and if so that they be produced. At Question 557, the Defendant requests the notes and records of Dr. Koza and Dr. Kene, who were with the Plaintiff, and who took part in the meetings, be produced. The response is that each question and request will be taken under advisement. Counsel for the Defendant makes a very practical observation, to the effect that this is a good tactic to protect a witness from having to give a direct and responsive answer. This certainly slows down the discovery process.
[110]
In the present instance the Defendant submits that the material generated by the discussion group, in trying to solve the problem, is relevant in that it would show what was known in the industry at the time; that it would also go to the scope of the patent and whether it is restricted to a particular printing process; and to value, if the solution were to a problem that hardly ever arose, in which case it would be of little value.
[111]
The Plaintiff counters that this is a fishing expedition, that the material is irrelevant, that it would be a substantial job to check through all of the company's records, and that the material does not go to any area pleaded by the Defendant.
[112]
The only objection to production of any substance is whether the usefulness of 10-year old records is outweighed by the time, trouble and difficulty involved in obtaining the material. I must look to what is reasonable and fair under the circumstances.
[113]
At the meeting were Dr. Koza, the then President of the predecessor company to the Plaintiff, Dr. Kene, a consultant and the witness, Mr. Behm, then Vice President of Product Development and Security, in all a fairly high powered group. The discussion was apparently on point and might well be relevant. The utility of the material generated by the participants to the meeting could be substantial. This outweighs the time, trouble and difficulty involved in locating records that are only ten years old and indeed parties to litigation must take into account, as a part of the cost of litigation, such time-consuming tasks. As much of the material as exists shall be produced, except for that material generated by and in the possession of Doctors Koza and Kene, for Rule 448 (2) limits production of documents to those within the possession, power or control of a party. Doctors Koza and Kene are no longer with the Plaintiff. Rule 454 deals with discovery of documents from those who are not parties.
[114]
The same consideration applies to the request, at page 159, that the company enquire of Doctors Koza and Kene as to whether they have any notes or records, for it would be for the Defendant to apply under Rule 454 for production of those documents.
Questions 560 and 561, Page 160
[115]
Leading up to Question 559 is the admission by the witness that the discussion group consisting of Doctors Koza and Kene and the witness eventually reached an acceptable solution and that they wrote about that solution, which the witness later notes resulted in a decision to file for patent protection on the solution. The Defendant would like the production of all writing made about the concept or solution up to and including 10 July 1987. This is much the same issue dealt with in previous Questions 552 through 557. The material, except to the extent it is held by Doctors Koza and Kene and thus beyond the possession, power or control of the Plaintiff, shall be produced, for this material goes at least to validity and to the seriousness of the problem and thus to the value of the solution.
Question 569, Pages 161 and 162
[116]
At Question 569 counsel for the Defendant requests the production of all material describing the invention which the witness wished to have patented and which material he provided to the American patent attorney, one Mr. McMurray.
[117]
I have dealt with the admissibility of such material in the context of the Defendant's question 179 later in these reasons. But of course, there is also the issue of privilege.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the Court of Appeal considered whether a letter written by in-house counsel to an American patent agent was privileged. The Court held there was nothing in the letter to indicate whether in-house counsel wrote the letter in his capacity as an attorney and thus the letter was ordered produced (page 208).
[118]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the Court of Appeal considered, among other things, correspondence pertaining to a foreign patent application. Mr. Justice Pratte, writing for the Court, pointed out that American solicitors were not entitled, as such, to prosecute applications before the patent office, that privilege being reserved to patent agents. The Court went on to note that in Canada professional legal privilege does not extend to patent agents.
[119]
The onus of establishing privilege rests on the party asserting that privilege:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.). In the present instance counsel has done nothing more than to say that there are cases establishing privilege where documents are sent to a patent attorney. Granted, Mr. Justice Joyal in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.) held that documents passing between the Plaintiff and its American patent attorney were privileged, however he apparently based that determination on the comment of Mr. Justice of Appeal Urie in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  distinguished between a letter written to a patent agent in the United States, which was not privileged, and an opinion which was privileged.
[120]
In summary, not only does the case law not assist the Plaintiff, but in addition the Plaintiff has failed in its obligation to establish privilege, for there is no affidavit of material of any sort, merely counsel's submission that the material is privileged. The requested material shall be produced.
Questions 575 and 577, Page 163
[121]
At Questions 575 and 576, counsel for the Defendant, after learning of a meeting between the witness and Mr. McMurray, the patent agent, asks when the meeting took place. At Question 577 he asks that any records which help the witness to refresh his recollection be produced.
[122]
The timing of the meeting with Mr. McMurray might have some relevance in establishing a date for the commencement of a claim of privilege. Question 575 might be relevant were privilege still at issue.
[123]
As to the claim of privilege itself, for "...any record that you have which help you to refresh your recollection about those dates?" (Question 577), the Plaintiff's lawyer characterizes the material as privileged communication with a lawyer as to patent rights. However there is no affidavit of material on that point to satisfy the burden on the party claiming privilege. The documents will therefore be produced.
Question 629, Page 175
[124]
Earlier in the discovery the witness for the Plaintiff said that its tickets were printed either through a dual security process or by using the related process, in which a hidden indicia under the latex scratch off portion of the ticket can be reconstructed from either a validation number or from a ticket pack number. At Question 629 counsel asks who developed the related process. His position is that this information is needed in order to prepare the case. The Defendant views the patent as including a dual past printing technique. However the Plaintiff says it uses both the dual past technique and the related process. The Defendant's position is that if the related process was developed by the Plaintiff he would ask more questions, but if it was developed elsewhere, he also would have to go outside in order to understand the case to be met.
[125]
It is certainly relevant that the Defendant learn something of the related process in order to establish the case to be met. That in itself is a ground for production. However there is a second ground. Rule 465.4 (1) requires, "A person who objects to a question that is asked in an oral examination for discovery shall briefly state the grounds of the objection for the record." Earlier in the discovery of Mr. Behm counsel for the Plaintiff said, "Just so we're clear and I think we are, so that we understand each other, when I say I'm taking under advisement, take that as a refusal,...", and then went on to say, in the context of a request for production of documents, "...but I want to think about it and get some further advice on the matter." (Page 163). In the context of oral discovery Question 629, we have a refusal to answer a straightforward question, but no grounds for the objection as required by Rule 465.4 (1), other than a query as to relevance which counsel for the Defendant deals with on the record. This 1990 amendment to the
Federal Court Rules
was to bring them into line with the discovery rules of other courts. I am not aware of any case law as to the purpose of this type of rule, but to my mind it is to speed up the discovery process by requiring, however brief, a ground for the objection, thus giving examining counsel some idea of whether he ought to spend time and money applying for an answer. Here, Plaintiff's counsel has failed to comply with a mandatory provision that he state some ground for the objection. This is a second reason that an answer is required.
Question 648, Page 180
[126]
The question here is whether the Plaintiff intentionally prints or has printed information or numbers on both sides of the ticket which are identical. The Defendant's point is that identical numbers on each side may go to the commercial success argument. It also goes to validity, for the printing of the same number on each side is not new, but a long known state of the art practice. The objection, in the transcript, is that since the Plaintiff has not decided whether it will rely on commercial success, the question will not be answered at that point. As I have noted earlier, the Plaintiff has now opted to rely, at least in part, on commercial success. Thus the ground for objection, set out in the transcript, is no longer valid.
[127]
The Plaintiff has a second argument, touched on during the hearing of this motion and elaborated on later in writing. It is that the product made by the Plaintiff is irrelevant to the issues of construing the patent: the Plaintiff refers to
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.) at 157 in which Mr. Justice Collier quotes a lengthy passage from
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.) at 197-199, and to
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  proposition.
[128]
Examination of the product may be for yet other reasons, including obviousness, whether the practice has long been known, going back before the patent was registered, and whether there is any general value in the invention. Here the Defendant is exploring the possibility of identical numbers on both sides of the ticket and if there are, that might be an indication of a remedy for a very minor mischief and thus a low commercial value to the patent. This question is borderline. However, I should exercise the benefit of the doubt in favour of answering such a question:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.) at 134.
[129]
Question 649 asks when the first ticket with identical information on each side was printed and whether that ticket also included an integrity number. Having allowed Question 648, Question 649 is relevant.
Question 650, Pages 181 and 182
[130]
At this point in the discovery of Mr. Behm counsel requests the tickets that have been printed by Scientific Games Inc., either the present Plaintiff or its predecessor, which have utilized an integrity number, an indication of what that integrity number is and to what it is linked. On the transcript counsel both acknowledge that this contains a commercial success aspect. As noted earlier commercial success is part of the Plaintiff's claim.
[131]
This is a question dealing at least in part with what the Plaintiff produces and its commercial success, not with the construction of the patent. However, counsel advises that the Plaintiff has produced hundreds of varieties of tickets over the years and to make up an archival file of all of them would be very onerous. This is an instance in which the probable usefulness of the material is outweighed by the time, trouble and difficulty involved in putting together the material. Under all the circumstances it is not reasonable to have the Plaintiff to produce this sort of material which appears to be of low utility and perhaps doubtful relevance. This material need not be produced.
Question 651, Page 183
[132]
Following a discussion of the dual security process and of the related process, counsel asks why the dual security process was given that name by the Plaintiff. The witness cannot recall. The Defendant's submission is that it views the scope of the patent as being the dual security process and that may go to the validity of the patent. Counsel admits that it may be hard to determine relevance of a question at this stage, however, discovery should be broad in the sense of finding relevant matters or finding dead ends.
[133]
There are a number of reasons why this question need not be answered, including that it smacks of a fishing expedition, that the utility of the answer may be out of all proportion to the effort to discover the answer and that generally the testimony of an inventor as to the nature of invention is generally not admissible for the purpose of describing the invention: see for example
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at 479/480, a decision of the Federal Court of Appeal.
Questions 719, 720 and 722
[134]
The Plaintiff has agreed that it will answer these questions.
Questions 723, 724 and 782, Pages 223 through 224 and 246
[135]
These questions involve whether the Plaintiff has ever used, as the integrity number, the validation number of the ticket; whether, in Mr. Behm's view, a ticket can have the validation number and an integrity number; whether the Plaintiff had printed lottery tickets using the related process with a validation number on the front and a book and ticket number on the back and if so why not; and if such tickets were printed, would there be any reason for printing an integrity number on such a ticket.
[136]
To begin, Plaintiff's counsel gives no reason for refusing to let the witness answer Question 724. That is a breach of Rule 465.4 (1).
[137]
Counsel for the Plaintiff at least implied that Question 723 is irrelevant. Counsel for the Defendant explained that Pollard Banknote Tickets do not have an integrity number but have a validation number, a part of which is on the front and a part which is on the back. What Pollard Banknote wishes to know is whether Scientific Games has printed tickets in which its integrity number is the validation number, which is an old concept, thus going to the validity of the patent and to the value of a ticket with yet another number on it and perhaps to the cost of any infringement if the integrity number is of little or no value.
[138]
Counsel for the Plaintiff is correct in that the Plaintiff's product is probably not relevant when it comes to construing the patent. But whether a validation number can be an integrity number is relevant. The Plaintiff will answer question 723.
[139]
If the Scientific Games integrity number is in fact a validation number and if that is an old concept, the patent may be invalid or, on an accounting of profit, any infringement might have little or no value. On this basis both Questions 724 and 782, dealing with the printing of tickets using the related process, will be answered.
Question 751, Pages 233-234
[140]
Pollard Banknote wish to know whether Scientific Games have ever printed tickets on non-laminated stock and if so whether such tickets included an integrity number. In addition, it wishes those tickets identified. The issue here is whether there can be infringement in the case of a non-laminated ticket and what, from Scientific Games' perspective, is considered to be non-laminated paper stock.
[141]
The statement of claim, in referring to claims 1 through 8 of the patent, which is attached, is clearly limited to a laminated lottery ticket. The view of Scientific Games, as to what constitutes non-laminated paper is not relevant.
Questions Agreed to be Answered
[142]
The Plaintiff has agreed to answer Questions 804 through 806, 811, 812, 813 through 815, 816, 819, 821, 830, 833 through 840 and 877.
Questions 930 through 933 and 936, Pages 304 through 306
[143]
These questions arise out of the Plaintiff's admission that when a customer requests printing only on one side of a ticket, the Plaintiff also routinely provides a quote for printing on both sides, including an integrity number. The Defendant wishes copies of the quotations on which the Plaintiff has included, as an option, an integrity number on the reverse, an option which customers, according to the witness, probably accepted on occasion. The Defendant's reasoning is that the material is relevant in order to determine, from the Plaintiff's own material, the value it places on an integrity number.
[144]
Counsel for the Plaintiff submits this is no real insight as to profit apportionment and at best is an indication that some lotteries might decide to use an integrity number even though all they really wished was printing on one side.
[145]
In that the Plaintiff has not left the area of profit to a reference, but wishes it decided at trial, this is a proper subject for discovery. The question does not deal with whether or not customers wished an integrity number, but rather with the value the Plaintiff puts on an integrity number in certain circumstances. It may not be conclusive as to the value of an integrity number, but may be of assistance to the Defendant to do damage to the Plaintiff's claim and thus is relevant. The questions will be answered.
Questions 1066, 1071 and 1072, Pages 346 through 348
[146]
These questions all involve a 22 September 1986 document, critical of the California State Lottery, which have an alphanumeric code on the front of the ticket, styled as a winner integrity number, which is viewed as a security weakness. The Defendant would like to know when the California instant lottery tickets first had a winner integrity number and who suggested such to the California State Lottery. The Defendant would also like an original of the particular ticket, referred to in the material already produced and called Exhibit 18-15-1. It would like the entire document from which Exhibit 18-15-1 is taken and production of all other documents used to prepare Exhibit 18-15-1 or which were exchanged with the California State Lottery and which described the state of the art as of the summer of 1986.
[147]
In answer to Question 1071, counsel for the plaintiff says he will look at the document and consider its relevance: counsel for the Defendant acknowledges that such would be satisfactory. Production of the documents used to prepared Exhibit 18-15-1 would depend upon the relevance of the exhibit itself, which counsel is going to consider.
[148]
This leaves Question 1066, which involves the refusal of background information about how the California lottery tickets came to have a winner integrity number printed on the front to ensure the ticket has not been delaminated. Given the issues in the present litigation this is a relevant line of questioning. Mr. Behm shall make the relevant searches and enquiries and provide answers.
Question 1125, Pages 366 and 367
[149]
Plaintiff has produced a representative piece of promotional literature as a relevant document. The Defendant would like to have production of all samples of promotional literature in order to understand the manner in which the Plaintiff was trying to sell its integrity number and what the market was prepared to pay for an integrity number.
[150]
Given that the Plaintiff considers this particular piece of promotional literature a relevant producible document, other similar promotional literature should also be produced.
Agreement between Counsel
[151]
Following the adjournment for the day on the 12th of February, counsel were able to shorten the initial list of answers sought by the Defendant. The next morning we turned first to the remainder of a list of refusals given by counsel on the examination for discovery of Mr. Behm on 29 through 31 May 1996 and 16 and 17 October 1996. We now turn to the remaining questions, those set out in Exhibits A and B and which have not been resolved between counsel.
Questions 257 through 260 at pages 80 and 81
[152]
These questions, involving the Pennsylvania State Lottery Commission, culminating in a request at question 260 that the Plaintiff look for and produce any documents regarding the request by the Lottery Commission to break a link between the validation number and the book number of their tickets. Earlier in these reasons I determined that such material is relevant and that its utility out-weighed the time and trouble of making a reasonable search. The Plaintiff will make reasonable efforts to discover and produce the material.
Question 482 at page 134
[153]
Counsel asks whether the Plaintiff has ever bid on the printing of tickets for sales to any lottery in Canada and on which they proposed to print an integrity number.
[154]
Counsel for the Plaintiff, in dealing with a similar earlier question, undertook to make some inquiries to see if there were any sales or offers but wished to restrict answers to sales. Question 482 is a follow-up.
[155]
On the hearing of the motion, counsel for the Plaintiff took the position that a proposal to print a ticket is not relevant, but made no objection, following question 482, when counsel for the defendant requested the information. Again, Rule 465.4 (1) requires that the grounds of the objection be stated on the record. The information shall be produced.
Question 501 at pages 139
[156]
This question has two aspects, first a production of all of the promotional literature of Scientific Games relating to instant lottery tickets and second advice as to whether the Plaintiff is relying upon the commercial success of the invention and if so the facts upon which it intends to rely, including threats of lawsuits and the bringing of lawsuits in order to assert its patents. Counsel for the Plaintiff agreed to look through its promotional material and determine if there is anything relating to integrity numbers or the substance of what is claimed in the patent. This is a reasonable response and the Plaintiff will produce that material. Counsel for the Plaintiff has now advised that the Plaintiff will be relying upon the commercial success of the invention. If there is additional promotional material bearing on that point it will be produced.
[157]
Commercial success now having been put at issue by the Plaintiff, that brings into play the second portion of the question, the facts upon which the Plaintiff intends to rely to show commercial success. However, as the question presently stands it is too general: it may be relevant, but it ought to have been more specifically explored on examination for discovery.
Question 714 at pages 201 and 202
[158]
This question deals with reports as to the types of mischief encountered by Lottery Commissions. The Plaintiff subsequently gave an answer which the Defendant feels is not responsive. Counsel for the Plaintiff has agreed to clarify the answer.
Question 756 and 768 at pages 235, 236, 240 and 241
[159]
Counsel for the Defendant seeks production of any writings made by Mr. Behm or others who are with the Plaintiff in relation to other benefits achieved in arriving at the solution to the delamination problem. Counsel for the Defendant submits that such additional benefits go to the value of the solution and may be a measure of what the market is prepared to pay for tickets valuing the patent.
[160]
Counsel for the Plaintiff argues, in part, that the statement of the inventor, interpreting the patent, is not admissible and therefore the question is irrelevant. Leaving this objection aside, I do not see the relevance of written material, particularity from the inventor, speculating on additional benefits. Such material is not a market place value concept. The material requested at question 756 is irrelevant and need not be produced.
[161]
The Defendant wishes to know, at question 768, whether Scientific Games ever made a ticket on which the validation number is algorithmicly linked to the book and ticket number on the other side. The Defendant says much of this was known in the industry and that the question goes to whether there was any invention if all that Scientific Games did was merely to add another number to those already on the ticket. In short, the question is said to go to value, or to that portion of the profit derived from infringement and an apportioning of profit.
[162]
Counsel for the Plaintiff says that whether the Plaintiff manufactured such a ticket is not a relevant measure of value. The question may, however, lead to a relevant line of questions, assuming that Scientific Games has made such a ticket, as to the value of such a ticket in the market place. These might well be proper questions. The Plaintiff shall answer question 768.
Question 12 at pages 4 and 5
[163]
At this point, counsel turned to Exhibit E attached to the Pollard affidavit, the list of refusals given by Mr. Behm on his Examination for Discovery 29, 30 and 31 May 1996. At question 12 counsel asks when Mr. Behm first worked on the invention that gave rise to the patent in this litigation. The Defendant says the question goes to the state of the art and common knowledge at the time of the invention. The Plaintiff says that it is the date of the invention and its American patent filing that are relevant, not the date of the work giving rise to the patented invention. This aspect of question 12 is different from that dealt with earlier in the reasons. The earlier aspect of the question involved priority date. The Defendant now wishes to know when the inventor first worked on the invention.
[164]
I believe the conventional approach to a date by which to measure common knowledge to look to the common knowledge in extent just before the patent is applied for: see for example
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at 270 and also
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  relevance of when the invention was worked upon. In addition, counsel for the Plaintiff has undertaken to advise counsel for the Defendant if the Plaintiff will rely on any other date than the patent's priority date, in which case the Plaintiff has also undertaken to provide an opportunity to ask further appropriate questions.
Questions 41, 42 and 43 at pages 15 and 16
[165]
In this series of questions counsel for the Defendant wishes to know Mr. Behm's contribution to the invention, the contribution of his co-inventors and whether they worked together in making the invention. Here the Defendant is trying to the determine what was created beyond the then state of the art and by trying to determine what the inventors did or contributed goes, says counsel for the Defendant, to validity and if there is an infringement, to allocation of profit.
[166]
Counsel for the Plaintiff submits that what individuals contributed is not at issue, but rather one should look to the overall invention: what the inventor says is irrelevant, for one should look to the patent as drafted.
[167]
The approach of analysis
ex post facto
has been frowned upon by the courts:
"I confess that I view with suspicion arguments to the affect that a new combination, bringing with it new and important consequences in the shape of practical machines, is not an invention, because, when it has once been established, it is easy to show how it might be arrived at by starting with something known, and taking a series of apparently easy steps. This
ex post facto
analysis of invention is unfair to the inventors, and, in my opinion, is not countenance by English Patent Law."
(
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at 230 (C.A.))
In short, there is a danger of wisdom after the event. Rather than try to determine, from the inventor, what he thinks he brought to the invention, the Defendant ought to establish what was then the state of the art, not through the inventor, but independently and then look at the invention. This would be a more relevant approach. The questions need not be answered.
Questions 124 through 127 at pages 37 through 39
[168]
Counsel for the Plaintiff has agreed to answer questions 114, 115 and 116. This brings us to another series, questions 124 through 127 involving the response by the Plaintiff to bids from lottery operators. Following submissions by counsel for the Defendant, that these questions touch on obviousness, common knowledge, allocation of profit and the market leading up to the invention, counsel for the Plaintiff agreed to answer all of the questions save the production of documents that were exchanged between customers and the Plaintiff in the bidding process in the late 1970's and through until the mid 1980's: counsel for the Plaintiff looks upon this last item as both a monumental task and as a fishing expedition. Counsel for the Defendant submits that this goes to common knowledge and the importance of the mischief of delamination, for the latter is no longer important and of any real value by reason of on-validation.
[169]
I am not persuaded that this material is relevant in determining common knowledge and value. Moreover, the time and expense of the search exercise would likely be out of all proportion to the value of the material. Such documents need not be produced.
Questions 128, 129, 131 and 133 at pages 40 through 42
[170]
Earlier in these reasons, at question 1125, I dealt with promotional material after 1986. The Defendant now wishes to have promotional literature for instant win lottery tickets between the period of 1978 through 1985. This material is said to bear on what was common knowledge and the allocation of profits. The Plaintiff says that to ask for all promotional material is too broad and is a fishing expedition.
[171]
The promotional material requested is for the period before the patent came into being. I am not convinced it is relevant. The material sought, arising out of question 128 and 129, need not be produced. The same reasoning applies to marketing material used during the same period: the material requested at question 133 need not be produced.
Questions 173, 174 and 175 at pages 52 and 53
[172]
Following submissions by counsel for the Defendant, that the witness ought to be required to speak to problems drawn to his attention regarding the validation process of a lottery ticket, counsel for the Plaintiff agreed that the witness would answer that question. Similarly, the Plaintiff subsequently agreed to answer question 175, as to whether the Plaintiff prints an integrity number on its tickets.
[173]
The remaining question, number 174, is whether the Plaintiff presently prints, on its instant win lottery tickets, any numbers other than the game, book, ticket, validation and cheque sums that were printed on its tickets in 1978. Now it is fairly clear that the Defendant is trying to determine whether the Plaintiff still uses an integrity number and if there is not such, is there another number with the same function. This is relevant in order to determine the present value, if any, of an integrity number. The question is relevant and will be answered.
Question 179 at pages 55 and 56
[174]
At this point, counsel for the Defendant asks for the files of the Plaintiff, or its predecessor and the files of its agents, in the filing and prosecution of the American and Canadian patent applications.
[175]
To begin, parties ought not be able to use such material to construe patents, in the sense of enlarging or narrowing the scope of the patent: see for example
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at 86-87 (F.C.), affirmed (1986) 12 C.P.R. (3d) 193 and the unreported 10 April 1997 decision of Mr. Justice Gibson in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  determine what was common knowledge at the time. The Defendant believes the documents will deal with the nature of an algorithm and with printing on the front and back of a ticket, that is with common knowledge, the nature and purpose of the invention and with obviousness. Counsel for the Defendant makes the point that it is not requesting documents which may be subject to solicitor/client privilege, but rather material flowing between the company and its American and Canadian patent agents.
[176]
Subject of course to relevance, documents passing between an applicant for a patent and its patent agent, or patent solicitor, may be admitted, not for the purpose of construing the terms of the patent, but as evidence of what prior art had been before the patent examiner: see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.) at 314 a decision of Madam Justice Reed, who also dealt with the area at length in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.) at page 42 and following. After surveying the area she concluded:
"It seems clear that information contained in file wrappers, either domestic or foreign, may be relevant for some purposes on some occasions. It may be that much of the information obtained by asking questions relating thereto will turn out to be irrelevant but that is the decision of the trial judge to decide in the context of the case as presented. It is often difficult to know whether the answer to a question is relevant before one knows what the answer is and how it fits into the defendant's theory of its case." (page 47)
She concluded that the train of inquiry, information in patent applications, was one that the Defendant was entitled to pursue at that stage, for it would be premature, at the discovery stage, to prevent questions being asked concerning information contained in file wrappers. In the present instance the Plaintiff will produce the material requested.
[177]
In subsequent sequences of questions, 180, 181, 182, 186 and 196, the Plaintiff has now agreed to provide answers.
Questions 197 and 198 at page 61
[178]
In the course of these two questions, counsel for the Defendant seeks to determine whether the witness, Mr. Behm, prepared any memo or written material on the subject of an integrity number between 1987 and the present. Ostensibly this is to deal with issues of what was common knowledge and the meaning of the term "integrity number". In essence, the argument seems to be that these questions relate to factual aspects of the invention. In my view, the questions deal not with factual information, but rather as to interpretation of the scope and nature of the patent by the inventor and as such are not permissible.
Question 200 at page 62
[179]
At question 200, counsel for the Defendant asks who first manufactured or printed a ticket containing an integrity number. Counsel says that perhaps this occurred before the claim of the invention, but if it was after the invention it would be interesting to know how the manufacturer or printer acquired the use of an integrity number that would go to an accounting of profits if the Plaintiff had not thought fit to prosecute the user.
[180]
The Plaintiff suggests the Defendant is purely fishing, although that would not be the case if such a ticket had been printed before the claim of the invention. On the face of it, this question may well be relevant. Further, counsel for the Plaintiff, on the discovery, merely objected to the question without giving any grounds for the objection. The Plaintiff will provide an answer.
Questions 285 through 289 at pages 87 and 88
[181]
Leading up to this question, the witness noted that at one time it was not technically possible to print data on both sides of a ticket simultaneously using a web press. Subsequently technical advancements were made, the first advance to allow printing on both sides of the ticket stock and that was developed "to practice our invention". This leads to question 289 as to what, in context of this statement and in the witness's own words, is the invention. Now to put this into a further context the witness agreed, at question 293 "... that validation numbers had been algorithmicly linked to book and ticket numbers for many years in the lottery business." and that the technical change was not the algorithmic link, but rather putting linked data on two sides of the ticket.
[182]
The patent is perhaps somewhat ambiguous in that it seems to refer both to an algorithmic link and to printing on both sides of ticket stock. I view the question, as to what the Plaintiff means by practising the invention, not as the explanation of an inventor as to what is the invention, which would not be proper, but rather as an interpretation of a term or phrase used by the witness. It is similar to question 1597 on the Plaintiff's discovery of Mr. Pollard. It is a proper question and is to be answered.
Question 301, 304, 305 and 306 at pages 89 through 93
[183]
I have already touched on the admission that the technical change initiated by Mr. Behm as an inventor was not the algorithmic link, but rather that of printing linked to data on both sides of a ticket. Counsel went on to establish the names of Mr. Behm's co-inventors and then asked when the three inventors had conceived the idea.
[184]
When the idea was conceived might go to the state of the printing art at the time of the invention. However, the Plaintiff has indicated it is relying on the date of the patent application, not some other date. Thus the relevant date is just before the making of the patent application. The question is irrelevant and need not be answered.
[185]
Counsel for the Defendant characterizes questions 304, 305 and 306 as dealing with timing and a determination of whether the numbers on the front and back of the ticket were motivated by the new printing process. However, the questions ask how the three inventors came to develop the idea and for the production of documents relating to the work that was done by the three inventors.
[186]
In the defense, the Defendant says the claims are broader than the invention, in short that the invention claimed is not the same as the invention which was made. Put into that context the documents requested a question 306, related to the work that was done by any one of the three inventors and the company, is relevant: see for example
Foseco Trading (Supra)
at page 42. I do not see that questions 304 or 305 are particularly relevant, but the documents requested at 306 are to be produced.
Questions 337 and 338 at pages 98 and 99
[187]
Leading up to questions 337 and 338, the topic under discussion is a dual security process, which initially used two computers to control the printing process, but subsequently the Plaintiff was able to accomplish the printing using just one computer. Counsel for the Defendant then asks first whether the Plaintiff applied for patents on the development of the dual security process and then whether any patents were issued on the dual security process developed by the Plaintiff. It seems apparent, from a subsequent answer, at question 344, that the dual security process itself had been used before 1986, but that it was not possible to algorithmicly link numbers on the front and back. The thrust of the Defendant's question is the link between the printing process and the invention, for counsel explains that since the Plaintiff will not produce any documents on the subject, the Defendant would like to know whether there are any public documents and that one way is to determine whether any patents were applied for. This is relevant in order to learn something about the printing process and the patent at issue. The questions are to be answered.
Question 343 at page 101
[188]
Leading up to question 343, counsel for the Defendant asks when in 1986 the Plaintiff first practised the invention in question. The witness responds that he should recall, or that he should have looked it up for the purpose the discovery. At question 343, counsel for the Defendant begins a questions as to how the witness proposes to look up the old dates if he is asked to do so. Counsel for the Plaintiff, in anticipation of the question, says he will ask the witness not to answer but if counsel wishes he may go ahead and ask the question. The question is then put, asking the witness to determine when the invention was first practised by the company, how the witness determined that date and if it was through the review of documents, the production of those documents and any others that reflect the practising of the invention in 1986. Counsel for the Plaintiff then refuses the request, but without giving any reason.
[189]
Counsel for the Defendant gives a number of reasons why the question is relevant, including it goes to the value of the product for at some point after 1986 the concern of delamination ceased to exist. From this it follows that the invention may have had no value when it was first used.
[190]
I am going to allow this question for two reasons. First, counsel for the Plaintiff, at the time of the discovery, gave no reason for his refusal. Second, the question is relevant as it goes to the value of the patent.
Question 361 at pages 104 and 105
[191]
The question here is what lead to the idea of linking data on one side of the ticket to data on the other side of the ticket. Counsel for the Plaintiff again, without reason, directs the witness not to answer. On the hearing of the motion counsel for the Plaintiff confirms that what lead to the idea of linking the data was the California Lottery concern as to delamination. The Plaintiff will confirm that answer.
Question 449 at page 123
[192]
At question 449 counsel for the Defendant establishes that the Plaintiff keeps a partial archival file of tickets on which printing data on one side is algorithmicly related to data on the other side, some tickets produced by a dual security process and other tickets by the related process. At question 450 the Defendant seeks access to that file. Counsel for the Plaintiff refuses on the grounds first that he is not sure that it is particularly relevant and second that he wishes to get instructions with respect to the file and how it should be dealt with. Now either a document is relevant or it is not and it is not a matter of obtaining instruction from the client as to how the file should be dealt with.
[193]
Counsel for the Defendant says the tickets in the partial archival file kept by the Plaintiff may be relevant. Moreover, among other things, he wishes to look at the evolution of the Plaintiff's printing process and the numbers which are algorithmicly linked, which appear to have changed over time. Counsel also wishes to look at the present product to determine the utility of an integrity number.
[194]
This material, which the witness says is in a file and thus easily producible, may reasonably be supposed to contain information which the Defendant might use to damage the case of the Plaintiff. It is relevant. It is producible.
Question 465 at page 125
[195]
The Plaintiff has now agreed to answer question 465, as to whether there is a discount when a ticket is printed on both sides but the integrity number feature is not utilized. This question relates to allocation and profit apportionment.
Question 478 at pages 132 and 133
[196]
At question 478 counsel for the Defendant wishes to know who controls Scientific Games Inc. Counsel concedes it is not usually relevant but, in the present instance, it relates to the reason for bringing the suit.
[197]
If the action has been brought for an improper reason, that is for the trial judge to determine. However, control of the company does not, in my view, have any relevance. The question need not be answered.
Question 549 at pages 154 and 155
[198]
The Defendant wishes to know when the three inventors met to begin their project. This is similar to question 12 and need not be answered.
Question 568 at page 161
[199]
At question 568 the Defendant wishes to know how the invention was described to the company's patent attorney in the United States. It is clear that what the Defendant is looking for is a description of the invention for which a patent was to be sought. The question is objected too on the basis of solicitor/client privilege. Counsel for the Defendant makes the point that not every communication between an inventor and a patent attorney is privileged.
[200]
I have touched on a similar question, number 569, earlier in these reasons. This area is also dealt with in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.) as follows:
"Communications between a lawyer and his client for the purpose of obtaining legal advice are privileged, whether litigious or not. The professional legal privilege does not extend to patent agents because patent agents as such are not members of the legal profession. But privilege does exist for communications between a client and a patent agent, if conducted through the medium of the client's lawyer and made in contemplation of or during the course of litigation." (page 17)
Similarly, the Federal Court of Appeal pointed out in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  that communications between patent agents and their clients are not privileged (page 15). In the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case the Court was dealing with an American patent application. It assumed, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, that american lawyers were not entitled, as solicitors, to prosecute applications before the patent office, as that privilege was and still is reserved to patent agents, but went on to point out that legal advice is privileged and does not cease to be legal advice merely because it relates to proceedings in the patent office. However, in the final analysis, the Court of Appeal overturned the claim for privilege, allowed by the trial judge because the evidence submitted was not sufficient to establish the privilege claimed.
[201]
The burden, in a claim of privilege, is on the party asserting it. In the present instance I have nothing to go toward establishing privilege, other than the submissions of counsel that there is a
prima facie
claim for privilege when an inventor goes to a patent attorney for advice. In this instance, there is nothing to indicate the nature of the correspondence with the American patent attorney, whether it was for legal advice, which might be privileged, or merely with regard to filing a patent, which might not be privileged. There is not even evidence as to whether the American patent attorney was in fact a lawyer, or merely some species of patent agent. The Plaintiff having failed both to establish any American law that I ought to take into account and the burden of showing privilege. The material will be produced.
Questions 573 and 574 at pages 162 and 163
[202]
In this exchange, counsel for the Defendant asked the witness when, before the July 1986 filing date, he met with the American patent attorney. The answer is that it was probably in the order of six months before the application, but offers to go back and look for records. This is put as request at question 574, to which counsel to the Plaintiff gives a refusal.
[203]
I do not see the relevance of the date, even in the context, as suggested by counsel for the Defendant, of establishing privilege. It seems to have no bearing on anything. The date need not be provided.
Question 578 at page 164
[204]
At question 578 the witness is asked what literature he consulted in conceiving a solution to the problem. This question is one starting point to show what was common knowledge at the time. It is relevant and should be answered.
Question 771 at page 242
[205]
The question here is whether Scientific Games ever had any other lottery ticket manufacturer print tickets on its behalf. This is said to be a follow-up as to the printing process used. The issue of someone else printing tickets for the Plaintiff has neither bearing on anything nor relevance. It need not be answered.
Question 772 and 803 at page 242 and 251
[206]
Scientific Games was asked whether it ever printed a ticket where the integrity number was algorithmicly linked only to the book number. Counsel, on the transcript, says it is relevant as it goes to commercial success. The response is that the witness is directed not to answer the question for the Plaintiff has not yet said whether it would rely upon commercial success. The Plaintiff has agreed to answer the question and also to answer question 803 at page 251.
Question 807 at page 252
[207]
The question here is whether Mr. Behm, working with his two inventors to try to solve the delamination problem, considered linking the validation number to the book and ticket number, instead of placing all of those numbers on one side, placing the validation number on the opposite side. The parties differ as to the relevancy of this question.
[208]
The Plaintiff will answer this question as it might well go to the obviousness of the solution.
Question 827 pages 261 and 263
[209]
On the hearing of the motion the Plaintiff agreed to answer this question.
Question 828 and 829 at pages 264 through 266
[210]
The question here is fairly involved, but may be paraphrased: the Defendant wishes to know whether any of the allegedly infringing forty seven tickets made by the Defendant were also bid on by Scientific Games. Counsel has gone on to request, in his submissions, that Scientific Games ought to produce the specifications for any such tickets and where it bid, to advise how much of the bid price was ascribed to the provision of an integrity number and whether the particular lottery commission asked for an integrity number. This latter request does not appear in the transcript, however it might well be a follow up question as the initial question is relevant.
[211]
The Plaintiff has agreed to answer the question to a limited extent: if it bid on any of the forty seven tickets and if a portion of the price was allocated to an integrity number the Plaintiff will advise and will produce relevant material.
[212]
This request is parallel to material asked for by the Plaintiff at questions 847 through 849 and which I allowed as the material showed price and ticket characteristics whihc went to the issue of profits. In the present instance profits are not at issue, but rather an allocation of the price to an integrity number.
[213]
If on any of the forty seven tickets at issue the Plaintiff also bid, it will identify the ticket in question. If, in the Plaintiff's material, there is any price allocation as to the integrity number, it will also produce all such material for that ticket, and advise whether the customer asked for an integrity number.
Question 831 at page 267
[214]
At this point, counsel for the Defendant asks whether, in essence, the invention is the integrity number. I am going to disallow this question as the inventors view, as to what he has invented, is not relevant.
Questions 837 and 838 at pages 269 and 270
[215]
The Plaintiff has agreed to answer question 838 and all of question 837 except as to the production of the first ticket produced by Scientific Games which had on it an integrity number. This is a proper compromise, for production of a sample of the first ticket is irrelevant.
Questions 1062, 1065, 1148 and 1149 at pages 344 through 347, 373 and 374
[216]
At question 1062 the Plaintiff is asked to produced all documents relating to the request by the California Lottery for bids and responses made in the summer of 1986. The Defendant says that this goes to common knowledge, solutions considered and what was implemented. The Plaintiff denies all of this, but agrees that if there is an allocation of price, showing the value of the integrity number, the Plaintiff will produce that material. This is a fair resolution.
[217]
At question 1065 the Defendant requests all documents related to the WIN code for the California Instant Lottery tickets. I am not convinced this is relevant and therefore it will be refused.
[218]
Leading up to questions 1148 and 1149 Mr. Behm acknowledges that other manufactures use integrity numbers. However, counsel refuses to let him answer as to which manufacturers are involved and whether they use integrity numbers with or without a license from the Plaintiff. These requests may well have a bearing on the value of an integrity number. Questions 1148 and 1149 are to be answered.
Questions 1164 and 1165 at pages 377 and 378
[219]
This request for information and material is lengthy. The Plaintiff has agreed to provide the identity of the patent agents, both those who kept certain files and who undertook the prosecution of the patent, the identity of the lawyers or law firms through whom communications passed between the Plaintiff and patent agents and the involvement of those law firms in the prosecution of the Canadian patent application. The Plaintiff also advises that the nature of the correspondence or documents contained in the patent agent's files relate to obtaining the patent.
[220]
The Defendant says these are proper questions, which ought to be answered, for they lay the foundation for a challenge of the Plaintiff's plea of privilege. This relates back to the Defendant's request number 27 at page 56 of the Behm Discovery transcript, at which point counsel for the Defendant has requested production of the files kept by the patent agents, both in Canada and in the United States. I have already determined that the files of the American patent attorney are to be produced for, as I have already said, on this present application there was no material filed on behalf of the Plaintiff going to satisfy the burden of establishing privilege. The production of that material and the production of the Canadian patent agent's files have already been dealt with at question 179, thus the balance of the questions at page 377 and 378 are irrelevant.
Questions 1167 and 1168 at page 379 and 380
[221]
The Plaintiff has provided representative portions of proposals made by the Plaintiff which refer to the advantage of being able to provide an integrity number. The Plaintiff will produce any proposals which set out an allocation of price to an integrity number or which give a price for an integrity number. This is a fair resolution and will include any bids for the printing of tickets for sale to lotteries in Canada.
Question 1176 at pages 382 and 383
[222]
This question again deals with the production of documents constituting writings made by Mr. Behm or others within the Plaintiff organization in relation to additional benefits arising out of the solution already found. This has already been dealt with at questions 756.
Questions 1204 and 1206 at pages 391 and 392
[223]
The Plaintiff has agreed to answer these questions.
Questions 1209 and 1210 at pages 392 and 393
[224]
These questions deal with Mr. Behm's interpretation of the patent and with opinion. As with the Plaintiff's questions 1559 through 1561 they need not be answered.
[225]
The costs of the motions will be in the cause.
[End of document]