[1]
Muldoon, J.
: The plaintiffs appeal from the order, dated June 28, 1990, of the senior prothonotary, whereby he baldly ordered them, without articulated reasons, to make answer to 106 out of 107 questions demanding particulars by the defendants prior to their lodging any statement of defence. The learned prothonotary heard the parties' respective counsel on this matter, without stenographic reporting, during more than seven hours on March 27, 1990. His said written order indicates the vast volume of statutes and authorities which were put before him by the respective counsel and which he considered in formulating that order.
[2]
Even although the statement of claim, dated and filed on May 10, 1989, runs to almost sixteen tightly typed pages of foolscap (including the style of cause, taking 2 1/4 pages, about which, more later) in 56 paragraphs, in addition to the prayer for relief, the defendants' demand for some 107 particulars is surely prodigious, if it does not also evince carelessness or even facetiousness. That is not to say that the statement of claim is a model of lean, straightforward pleading. Nor is the plaintiffs' counsel's assertion of the flat-out urgency of this action especially convincing, since it appears that the plaintiffs prefer the costly ponderous interlocutory proceedings ever available in a formal action, as here, in the preparation of voluminous material to stave off the requirement to give particulars which exceeds the volume and effort required simply to give such particulars sooner, rather than later, rather than to get on with their allegedly "urgent" action.
[3]
For example, counsel for the plaintiffs avers that the most urgent of the plaintiffs' claims for relief is expressed in these paragraphs in the pleading:
"That Defendant Minister Bouchard [sic] be declared to have failed to comply with his constitutional and statutory duties in respect to the Federal Environmental Process contemplated by the James Bay and Northern Quebec Agreement and the said Guidelines Order in regard to the said Project;
"That an order of mandamus issue against Defendant Lucien Bouchard as Minister of the Environment ordering him to carry out or cause to be carried out in respect to the said Project the federal environmental impact assessment and review procedures contemplated by the James Bay and Northern Quebec Agreement and the Environmental Assessment and Review Process contemplated by the said Guidelines Order."
Now it may be that the plaintiffs have instructed their solicitors to proceed deliberately along this slow, ponderous path to achieve their "urgent" objectives. However it is clear, at latest since early January, 1990, that the quick and relatively inexpensive way to obtain a judicial determination of the plaintiffs' allegedly "urgent", alleged entitlement to mandamus, or if needed, prohibition or certiorari, would be to follow the course which is revealed in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[4]
The court expresses the foregoing observations because the plaintiffs' counsel suggested that it would be a hardship to compel the plaintiffs to go to the trouble of giving particulars when their case is so urgent, but it is obviously not so urgent in their minds. In any event, the defendants' counsel urged, if there by any injustice here, the plaintiffs have inflicted it upon themselves since the demand for particulars was filed in mid-June, 1989.
[5]
Now, it is clear that so long as the learned senior prothonotary brought a judicial temperament, correct principles of law and their correct application in fact to his adjudication of the defendants' motion for particulars, his decisions are not to be disturbed. The onus is upon the plaintiffs (appellants) to demonstrate the reasons, if any, for allowing their appeal against the decisions rendered by the senior prothonotary. Alas, he scarcely expressed any reasons. There is, however, no complaint expressed about the adjudicator's temperament in particular or any lack of natural justice in general. Mr. Justice McNair, in his reasons in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 104, at p. 107, cited the case of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Justice MacGuigan is reported, in analogous circumstances, thus:
"The order under appeal, being discretionary, should be overruled only if the motions judge [or prothonotary] were clearly wrong on the facts, or proceeded on an erroneous principle of law, or his decision resulted in some injustice to the plaintiff."
The plaintiffs assert that the learned prothonotary based himself on the wrong principles of law or on a mistaken application of the law perceived through no particularized reasons from him, for he gave none.
[6]
The order appealed from is based on a document submitted to the prothonotary by the plaintiffs' counsel, headlined "Categories of Particulars Requested", Schedule A under tab 1 of the plaintiffs' (appellants') memorandum of argument on this appeal. The organization of that order of June 28, 1990, is predicated on those categories, and since this is an appeal from the decisions expressed in that order, the court will retain that organization.
[7]
The first attack mounted on the learned senior prothonotary's said order posits that, in making it, he failed to appreciate the nature of the proceedings instituted by the plaintiffs (appellants) herein on May 10, 1989. Because, it is asserted, this action does "not involve private matters between individual litigants but rather involve[s] matters of substantial public importance and of considerable urgency" (an assertion, already noted, upon which the plaintiffs' own conduct of proceedings generates doubts) they say in the words of Lennox, J., in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> : "it is not right or expedient that the plaintiff should be
unnecessarily hampered
in preparing for or bringing his action for trial." (Emphasis not in original text.) Of course not. However, that well and logically written judgment by Lennox, J., gives the reader no real particulars of that 1926 case, one cannot say whether it is on a parallel with the present case. In any event there is no general rule whatever exempting plaintiffs in cases of substantial public importance from formulating proper and precise pleadings. Requiring adhesion to such a standard of originating pleadings is ipso facto never causing the originating party to be "unnecessarily hampered in preparing for or bringing on his action [or other proceeding] on for trial" [or hearing]. There is no indication herein that the senior prothonotary failed in grosso modo to appreciate any pertinent principle or made any error in law in this regard. The opposite is true, however, in particular instances.
[8]
It should be noted that the plaintiffs' solicitors, on the Friday (September 28, 1990) before the Monday on which this appeal came on for hearing, (October 1, 1990) provided by letter to the defendants' solicitors certain promises or undertakings to provide several of the particulars which were earlier refused and are the subject of this appeal. The plaintiffs or their solicitors may have perceived the irony of building an elaborate long drawn-out resistance against providing particulars which will have to be proved in the main and in the long run, thereby unnecessarily hampering, confusing and adding to the sheer volume of paper in, their own case "of considerable urgency". In any event despite the plaintiffs' disclaimer of "any admission that the statement of claim does not constitute a statement of the material facts sufficiently precise to allow the defendants to plead", the plaintiffs are merely undertaking to answer that which they were already ordered to particularize. Thus confirming the learned senior prothonotary in those regards, the plaintiffs are hereby ordered to comply in those regards in relation to which their appeal is dismissed.
[9]
The first two paragraphs of the statement of claim mention "Indian title, aboriginal rights and personal and usufructuary rights over, in and under all their traditional lands", and the second paragraph begins "The said Indian title, existing aboriginal rights and personal and usufructuary rights ...". So, were the defendants being careless or maybe somewhat facetious in their demand for particulars in asking if those
said
title and rights are the same as those referred to in paragraph 1? The plaintiffs have now promised particulars and the prothonotary's order is upheld in that regard. This judge conceivably might not have ordered particulars in regard to the rights of the plaintiffs in view of the description asserted by the plaintiffs, a form of particulars, in paragraphs 1 through 5 and in their prayer for relief, but that is of no moment. The senior prothonotary, under this category, part 1, "Rights of Plaintiffs", did not unduly burden the plaintiffs when he ordered:
"Answered orally and clearly argued; counsel for defendants is satisfied with the answer and his only requirement, that is ordered, is to receive that argument in writing."
So be it. There is absolutely nothing wrong with the prothonotary's astute recognition that counsel's oral argument constitutes or incorporates the very particulars sought by the defendants and his ordering them to be reduced to writing as and for compliance. Rule 415(3) is aptly invoked here. This, of course, points out the irony of the plaintiffs' hampering themselves in light of their professed urgency, by having declined simply to put into writing that which their counsel has already orally expressed.
[10]
The jurisprudence found in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , serves as no exemption from particularizing the plaintiffs' alleged rights, even though it was cited by their counsel, in stating:
"Claims to aboriginal title are woven with history, legend, politics and moral obligations. If the claim of any Band in respect of any particular land is to be decided as a justiciable issue and not a political issue, it should be so considered on the facts pertinent to that Band and to that land, and not on any global basis."
If ever there were a mandate for particulars, in order to permit the defendant to plead - necessarily in regard to the global basis expressed in the statement of claim - certainly in relation to the individual plaintiff chiefs' respective bands and their lands imported through the very style of cause, itself, that statement  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at p. 109 is such a mandate.
[11]
The sui generis nature of the plaintiffs' rights, raised by their counsel, do not need comment by the court in the instant proceedings. It is enough to note, as the defendants' counsel notes, that in paragraph 4 and following, of their statement of claim, the plaintiffs assert that their aboriginal "title and rights as described herein" transcend or are quite unaffected by the "Agreement of November 11, 1985, or related legislation, including the James Bay and Northern Québec Native Claims Settlement Act." Such an assertion, whether ultimately held to be true or false, cries out at this stage for particulars. The moreso, alleges the defendants' counsel, because the very clearly stated provisions of the text of "The James Bay and Northern Québec Agreement" with its racial basis for recognizing participation of the very same Grand Council of the Crees (of Québec), which is a plaintiff herein, provides in s. 2, the Principal Provisions, this:
"2.1 In consideration of the rights and benefits herein set forth in favour of the James Bay Crees and the Inuit of Québec, the James Bay Crees and the Inuit of Québec hereby cede, release, surrender and convey all their Native claims, rights, titles and interests,
whatever they may be
, in and to land in the Territory and in Québec, and Québec and Canada accept such surrender." (emphasis not in original text)
The defendants, under the name The Government of Canada, are also a party to that agreement. Now, this is most assuredly not the occasion for adjudicating the rights, wrongs, validity or invalidity of the plaintiffs' assertions, to which the defendants have the right to plead beyond a curt denial and putting the plaintiffs to the strict proof of their assertions. However, most assuredly, this is indeed the occasion upon which the plaintiffs must particularize their allegedly transcendant, unaffected title and rights.
[12]
Paragraphs 8, 14 and 42 allege as follow:
"8. In or about March, 1989, Hydro-Québec through a specific document tabled in l'Assemblée nationale du Québec announced plans to carry out a major mega-project in the traditional lands to produce about 15.1 Twh of electricity annually by building the Great Whale Complex with a capacity of 2,890 MW and two 735 kV transmission lines to transport the power south.
. . . . .
"14. Hydro-Québec and the Government of Québec have nonetheless declared publicly their intention to proceed with and to construct the Project."
(Paragraphs 15 and 16 are rich in particulars of the Great Whale River Hydro-electric Project, and accord the defendants ample scope for a full range of pleading - from sheer denial through qualified commentary, to absolute admission - in regard thereto.)
"42. Despite the well publicized plans of Hydro-Québec of which they have known for a considerable period of time, defendants have to date failed to consider or review properly any environmental implications of the Project or subject the Project to a proper environmental screening or initial assessment to determine any potentially adverse environmental effects from the Project in clear violation of Chapters 22 and 23 of the said Agreement and the said Guidelines Order."
[13]
Although quite within the bounds of propriety, the plaintiffs' solicitors' style of pleading is just a touch melodramatic and polemical (and far from boring) and it in turn, perhaps inevitably, provoked the defendants' solicitors' verbosely detailed, carelessly on-running, redundant and perhaps even facetious demand for particulars. Strong assertions generate strong responses. However, to go to the heart of this matter, what the plaintiffs are alleging is that Hydro-Québec's Great Whale River hydro-electric project, including its salient details and particulars, is firmly in the public domain.
[14]
Given the details and particulars provided in the statement of claim, the quintessentially public and resourceful defendants who are here impleaded can without doubt plead to paragraphs 8, 14 and 42 of the statement of claim. That should have been as clear to the learned senior prothonotary as it ought to have been to the defendants themselves. Plaintiffs are not required to give particulars, as it were in other words, of matters known, or readily available to be known, to the public at large even before the litigation is instituted. In failing to apply this principle, the learned senior prothonotary erred in law and in his appreciation of the factual basis of the matter. The plaintiffs' appeal is allowed in regard to this category, the second part of the order, "Public Announcement of Project" in which particulars regarding paragraphs 8, 14 and 42 of the statement of claim were ordered to be given, but do not need to be given.
[15]
Noteworthy is the fact that in August, 1990, the National Energy Board (hereinafter: NEB) issued its reasons for its decision, and copies of some seven licences EL-179 through EL-185, all issued on August 24, 1990, permitting the exportation by Hydro-Québec of seven blocks of firm power and associated energy to the U.S.A., being the states of Vermont and New York. The NEB is a federal board of which the defendants cannot be oblivious. Its copy of its reasons and the licences is printed in a document designated "EH-3-89 Exports of Electricity".
[16]
Some passages from the NEB's hearing and decision-document EH-3-89 are worthy of quotation here:
"Following the recent decisions by the Federal Court of Canada in respect of the Rafferty-Alameda dam in Saskatchewan and other works on the Oldman River in Alberta, the Board has complied with the EARP Guidelines Order by carrying out an environmental screening of all exports proposals. In conducting a screening of electricity export proposals, the Board examines the potential environmental and corresponding social effects in and outside of Canada, of the production, transmission and end use of the electricity proposed to be exported. The purpose of such a screening is to enable the Board to reach one of the conclusions required in s. 12 of the EARP Guidelines Order.
(pp. 34 and 35)
"Sufficient evidence was provided indicating that major hydro-electric facilities such as those required to meet the proposed exports do have environmental effects. Hydro-Québec itself did not deny this. The issue rather is whether, on balance, the environmental consequences are acceptable or mitigable. This, the Board does not know at this time.
(p. 37)
"Both Hydro-Québec and the Grand Council recognized that the facilities to be located within the territory covered by the James Bay Agreement are subject to such a comprehensive assessment and review process.
(p. 38)
"During the Board's deliberation on these applications following the public hearing, the government of Canada and Québec, through their respective environment Ministers, made statements about the efforts now underway to reach an agreement on a joint public review process to examine the environmental and social impacts of the Great Whale project in accordance with the provisions of both the James Bay Agreement and the EARP Guidelines Order. If such an agreement does not materialize, the Board then expects that, in any case, an environmental review under the EARP Guidelines Order will be undertaken by the Federal Government.
"The Board further believes that all other projects, either inside or outside of the territory covered by the James Bay Agreement, that would have to be constructed to support, in some measure, the proposed exports, may fall in areas of federal jurisdiction, such as navigable waters and/or fisheries. For these reasons, the Board is convinced that in order to comply with the EARP Guidelines Order or any other federal legislation that might replace the EARP Guidelines Order, such projects will need to undergo public review processes similar to those which will be undertaken for the Great Whale project."
(p. 39)
[17]
Now, although the NEB's document EH-3-89 was released after the prothonotary's order, it could have some bearing on the state of the pleadings and the matters at issue in this action. It may be that the plaintiffs' assertion of all the anticipated impacts of the Great Whale project is premature. It may be that the review required pursuant to the EARP Guidelines will determine that the wholly foreseeable environmental impacts will just not be mitigable by any known technology. These factors confirm the learned senior prothonotary's disposition in favour of providing to the defendants the plaintiffs' known particulars of those paragraphs of the statement of claim in which their assertions deal with the description of projects and impacts. The plaintiffs may wish to furnish, as particulars, some, all or more of the documents referred to in these reasons. This, after all, is their own chosen manner of articulating their complaints. The learned prothonotary erred in demanding particulars regarding paragraphs 48, 49 and 51. They are acceptable pleadings of the foreseeable harm which will befall themselves and the public as a consequence of the previous pleadings being established to the court's satisfaction. The defendants may, of course, if so advised, deny the assertions, but they can hardly need more particulars of the assertions in those three paragraphs.
[18]
Accordingly, except for particulars of the assertions in paragraphs 48, 49 and 51, the plaintiffs' appeal is dismissed in regard to part 3 of the order "Description of Projects and Impacts".
[19]
When plaintiffs claim that their rights will be violated they embark on legitimate speculation, for no one is obliged to wait until the alleged harm is done before seeking judicial authority to prevent any such harm. Legitimate as it is, however, it is still speculation. Therefore the obvious rule of pleading is that the rights must be stated for positive identification and content, and the apprehended violations must be particularized. If the rights were sufficiently identified, and the factual consequences of the hydro were also sufficiently particularized, then the apprehended violation of the alleged rights might become obvious.
[20]
Now, the learned senior prothonotary has redundantly required particulars of the pleadings in the plaintiffs' paragraph 24 at several occasions and in different categories in his order. That will not do. Paragraph 24 is to be particularized only once and that is pursuant to part 4 of the order "Violation of Rights and Statutes and the Constitution", in regard to which the appeal is dismissed.
[21]
In regard to the category in part 5 "Requirements under Federal Law", the redundant requirements to particularize the assertions expressed in paragraph 24b) of the claim is not to be imposed a second time, here. In regard to paragraph 251) of the statement of claim, for which particulars were ordered, they are not to be given only because the plaintiffs allege in a perfectly acceptable inclusive pleading that the project will have detrimental impacts and environment effects respecting:
"1) other areas and subject-matters of federal interest and federal responsibility and matters under federal legislation, subject to the jurisdiction and authority of plaintiffs."
The defendants, above all, and ahead of anyone else, in regard to paragraphs 25 1) and 26, must be deemed surely to know by heart all subject matters of federal interest, responsibility and legislation, or what purpose does the Department of Justice truly serve? However, if the plaintiffs have not by this point fully particularized their asserted "rights", "jurisdiction and authority" to which the federal authority is alleged to be subjected, this is the point, at least, at which the plaintiffs must state cogent particulars of their claim in regard to their alleged overriding "rights", "jurisdiction and authority". The prothonotary ruled that questions related to paragraph 31 of the statement of claim did not have to be answered, and no one has appealed that disposition. So be it, for now, but not for later on herein. The plaintiffs' appeal accordingly is allowed in part, and dismissed in part, in conformity with the above reasons in regard to part 5, "Requirements under Federal Law".
[22]
Part 6 of the order under appeal deals with "Fiduciary Obligations" so categorized by the plaintiffs themselves in the helpful document upon which the defendants' motion was heard by the prothonotary on March 27, 1990. It refers to paragraphs 27, 28, 29 and 31 of the statement of claim. Having found in part 5 of his order that particulars of paragraph 31 did not need to be furnished, the learned senior prothonotary went ahead in part 6 and ordered them to be furnished, albeit as stated orally at the hearing, anyway! Since the defendants have not cross-appealed, the denial of particulars for paragraph 31 stands as and where ordered by the prothonotary. His ordering of paragraph 31 particulars here and in part 7 must have been his best thoughts.
[23]
In regard to paragraphs 27, 28 and 29 of the statement of claim, it is impossible to believe that the defendants do not know of, and need particulars of the fiduciary obligation and protective role fixed by law in regard to all those of the plaintiffs' race. Certainly, they cannot be ignorant of the judgment of the Supreme Court of Canada in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , upholding the judgment of Mr. Justice Collier of this court's Trial Division. That much is clear. It is the full content of the plaintiffs' asserted rights, or at least so much of that content as is in issue in this litigation which the plaintiffs' have to particularize, for the defendants to be able to plead. Whatever the plaintiffs' say is the content of the rights which they are here asserting, as ordered, justifiably pursuant to rule 415(3), in part 1 of the impugned order, is what is required. To the extent that the plaintiffs have not answered that demand fully under part 1, now at latest, is the time to do it. With this understanding the plaintiffs' appeal is in part allowed, in part dismissed, regarding part 6 of the learned senior prothonotary's impugned order.
[24]
Part 7 of the subject order bears the headline: "Breaches of Agreement and James Bay and Northern Québec Native Claims Settlement Act" (JBNQA). While the agreement and the statute are in the public domain and deemed to be known to the defendants, their alleged breaches are not in the public domain, and, it may be, they exist only in the plaintiffs' minds, unless particularized in order that the defendants may plead for impartial adjudication. The plaintiffs' counsel says the JBNQA is a treaty pursuant to s. 35 of the Constitution. However, the plaintiffs, asserting conclusions of law, stating that certain actions of the defendants were unlawful or illegal, must also state what they allege to be the material facts on which such conclusions are based. While the defendants may have some inkling of the matters alleged, the plaintiffs surely must have some basis for making the allegations, which should be particularized. In pleading a treaty, foreign or domestic, the relevant sections ought to be particularized as a focus of the defendants' alleged breach of duty. So, with principles of common law and provisions of statutes.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  particulars of paragraph 31 of the statement of claim. Here he was correct.
[26]
With the exception of the prothonotary's redundant requirement regarding paragraph 24 of the statement of claim, the plaintiffs' appeal is dismissed in relation to part 7 of the prothonotary's order.
[27]
In regard to part 8 of the senior prothonotary's impugned order, "Federal Impact Assessment Processes", he redundantly ordered particulars with regard to paragraph 46 as he already did in part 7! Clearly particulars do not be needed to be furnished twice just because of the prothonotary's oversight. There is no other disposition to be made of this portion, part 8, but that the learned senior prothonotary erred in not noting that paragraphs 32 through 35 are quite rich in adequate particulars to which the defendants may plead as they choose. Paragraph 36 raises again the plaintiffs' allegation of overriding "jurisdiction and authority" over the land, which is too general and must be particularized.
[28]
The defendants do not need particulars of paragraphs 39 and 42 in light of the jurisprudence enunciated in the Canadian Wildlife Federation case earlier cited. They can plead to those paragraphs as they stand. The plaintiffs, in regard to the federal assessment and review procedures, have ample standing to sue for that kind of declaration.
[29]
Part 8 considers the plaintiffs' paragraph 45 for the first time. That paragraph is far too general, and the particulars of it (as in paragraph 46 earlier ordered) are quite properly ordered. In regard to part 8, then, particulars must be given in regard to paragraphs 36 and 45. Apart from those particulars, the plaintiffs' appeal is allowed in regard to part 8.
[30]
Part 9 of the impugned order deals with "Conflict of Interest", easy to allege, especially when not particularized. Such an allegation always calls for particulars. The plaintiffs' appeal is dismissed in relation to part 9 of the learned senior prothonotary's order.
[31]
Given the divided success on this appeal, no costs will be awarded to either side here and before the prothonotary. No accolades are awarded to either side who might yet succeed in complicating this action beyond all understanding, and thereby may achieve a result quite counter to the aspirations they each hope to achieve.
[32]
The style of cause is very long in this case because of the number of plaintiffs named with appended descriptive phrases. The style of cause shall be shortened to a more easily manageable length, but the short form shall in every respect stand for, and refer to all parties, no more, and no fewer, designated in the statement of claim and in all pleadings, notices and other process prior to and including the court's order herein. This shortened style of cause, undertaken by the court ex mero motu, shall be displayed on all court documents subsequent to the court's order herein. No doubt all parties hereto, in concern for the environment, will be gratified by such saving of paper, trees and forest to be thereby effected in this momentous litigation.
Appeal allowed in part.
Editor: Debra F. MacCausland/blk
[End of document]