[1]
Teitelbaum, J.
: This is an appeal by the appellant U.A.P. Inc., brought pursuant to s. 56(1) of the
Trade-marks Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. T-13 (
Act
) to the Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, from a decision of the Chairman of the Opposition Board dated October 31, 1991 which denied the appellant the right to have registered the trademarks "Automax" and "Automax & Design" for a majority of the wares and for a majority of the services requested.
[2]
Section 56(1) states:
"56(1) An appeal lies to the Federal Court from any decision of the Registrar under this Act within two months from the date on which notice of the decision was dispatched by the Registrar or within such further time as the court may allow, either before or after the expiration of the two months."
Facts
[3]
The appellant is a Quebec Corporation having its Head Office at 7025 Ontario St. East in the City of Montreal, Province of Quebec. On April 11, 1986, the appellant filed an application for the trademark "Automax" in relation to the following products and services:
"
Marchandises:
'Antigel, lave-glace, filtres à air, filtres à huile, filtres à essence, courroies de ventilateur, alternateurs, démarreurs, pompes à eau, peintures, liquide à moteur, huile de transmission, bicyclettes, pneus et sacs de couchage.'
"
Services:
'Exploitation d'une entreprise traitant de la distribution, de la vente au détail et de magasins offerts relativement à des pièces et accessoires automobiles; articles de quincaillerie et de peinture; articles et accessoires de sport; appareils et accessoires électroniques et électroménagers; appareils et accessoires de ménage et articles, ustensiles et accessoires de camping; services de réparation de véhicules et d'installations de pièces automobiles.'"
[4]
On June 11, 1986, the appellant filed a second application for the trademark "Automax & Design" in relation to the following products and services:
"
Marchandises:
'Antigel, lave-glace, filtres à air, filtres à huile, filtres à essence, courroies de ventilateur, alternateurs, démarreurs, pompes à eau, peintures, liquide à moteur, huile de transmission, bicyclettes, pneus et sacs de couchage.'
"
Services:
'Exploitation d'une entreprise traitant de la distribution, de la vente au détail et d'opération de magasins offerts relativement à des pièces et accessoires automobiles; articles de quincaillerie et de peinture; articles et accessoires de sport; appareils et accessoires électriques et électroménagers; appareils et accessoires de ménage et articles, ustensiles et accessoires de camping; services de réparation de véhicules et d'installations de pièces automobiles.'"
[5]
On August 27, 1987, Jacques Maby filed an opposition to the appellant's application for the trademark "Automax & Design", in which, according to the appellant, the main submissions are:
"a. La marque de commerce ne serait pas enregistrable car elle prêtrerait à confusion avec la marque de commerce déposée 'Auto Maxi & Dessin' enregistrée sous le numéro 317,757.
"b. La marque ne serait pas enregistrable puisqu'elle ne serait pas distinctive."
[6]
On January 18, 1988, Jacques Maby filed an opposition to the appellant's application for the trademark "Automax" giving, as his main submission for the opposition, the same reasons as given on August 27, 1987.
[7]
In reply to the oppositions filed by Jacques Maby, the appellant filed a reply in which the appellant denied the allegations contained in the Statements of Opposition. Furthermore, on March 8, 1988, with the consent of all the parties, the appellant filed an amended reply in which the appellant alleges that Jacques Maby did not use his trademark "Auto Maxi & Design". Jacques Maby had registered the trademark "Auto Maxi & Design" under number 317,757 on August 29, 1986.
[8]
Trademark No. 317,757 "Auto Maxi & Design" is for the following wares:
"Automotive accessories, namely, headlights, rear lights, fog lights; automotive article carriers, namely, roof racks, bicycle carriers, baggage racks, ski racks, sailboard carriers, and security straps for automotive article carriers; automotive security devices, namely, alarm systems, locking and anti-theft devices, and sirens; cables and security straps for use during towing; partitioning devices used for transporting animals; mirrors, wind deflectors, body mouldings, and convertible roofs."
[9]
According to the "Auto Maxi" trademark registration certificate, the mark was used in Canada by Jacques Maby since April 1982.
[10]
On May 5, 1989, Jacques Maby was granted permission to amend, as opposant, the respondent Jacques Maby to Automaxi S.A.
[11]
The parties hereto filed written submissions to the Chairman but did not ask for a hearing. The Chairman, on October 31, 1989, rendered his decision rejecting, in the main, the appellant's application to register the trademark "Automax" and the trademark and design "Automax & Design".
[12]
According to the appellant's notice of appeal, the grounds for the present appeal are:
"
Motifs
"Au soutien du présent appel, l'appelante prévoit, entre autres motifs, utiliser les moyens suivants pour démontrer que la décision rendue est mal fondée en faits et en droit et pour que soit accueilli le présent appel, savoir:
1. L'appelante entend produire des éléments de preuve conformément à l'article 56(5) de la
Loi sur les marques de commerce
.
2. L'appelante entend démontrer que la Commission des oppositions des marques de commerce a erré en faits et en droit en jugeant que les marques 'Automax' et 'Automax & Dessin' pouvaient porter à confusion avec la marque 'Auto Maxi & Dessin' quant aux marchandises et services énumérés ci-dessus au paragraphe intitulé 'introduction'.
3. L'appelante entend démontrer que la Commission a erré en faits et en droit lorsqu'elle a interprété les circonstances de l'espèce eu égard aux éléments d'appréciation énumérés au paragraphe 5 de l'article 6 de la
Loi sur les marques de commerce
, et plus particulièrement le genre de marchandises, services ou entreprises, la nature du commerce et la période d'emploi."
The Decision Of The Chairman Of
The Trademarks Opposition
Board (Chairman)
[13]
It must be noted that neither the appellant, nor the respondent filed any evidence before the Chairman. They both filed written submissions but neither party requested an oral hearing. Therefore, what the Chairman had before him in order to aid him in coming to a decision was the application to register the trademark "Automax & Design" filed by the appellant on June 11, 1986 which was based upon proposed use of the trademark in Canada in association with specific goods previously described and an application based upon use of the trademark in Canada since May 6, 1986 in association with specific services previously described. The Chairman also had before him the statement of opposition filed on August 27, 1987 by Jacques Maby in which he alleged that the appellant's trademark "Automax" is not registrable and not distinctive in that it is confusing with his (Maby's) registered trademark "Auto Maxi & Design", registration No. 317,757.
[14]
The appellant filed a counterstatement which was also before the Chairman.
[15]
During the opposition proceedings, the Chairman states that the applicant (appellant) amended its application by deleting "peinture" from its statement of wares.
[16]
The Chairman states, in his decision, that the only issue for determination "is whether there would be a likelihood of confusion between the applicant's (appellant's) trademark 'Automax & Design' as applied to the wares and services covered in its application and the registered trademark 'Auto Maxi & Design' registration No. 317,757, a representation appears below, covering automotive accessories, namely, headlights, rear lights, fog lights; automobile article carriers, namely roof racks, bicycle carriers, baggage racks, ski racks, sailboard carriers, and security straps for automotive article carriers; automotive security devices, namely, alarm systems, locking and anti-theft devices, and sirens; cables and security straps for use during towing; partitioning devices used for transporting animals; mirrors, wind deflectors, body mouldings and convertible roofs".
[17]
The design proposed for registration by the appellant is:
and the registered design of the respondent is
[18]
In that the Chairman determined that the issue for determination was one of confusion, he states:
"In determining whether there would be a reasonable likelihood of confusion between the trademarks at issue, the Registrar must have regard to all the surrounding circumstances, including those specifically set forth in s. 6(5) of the
Trade-marks Act
. Further, the Registrar must bear in mind that the legal burden is upon the applicant to establish that there would be no reasonable likelihood of confusion between the trademarks of the parties as of the date of decision, the material date in respect of a determination of the registrability of a trademark under s. 12(1)(d) of the
Trade-marks  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  unreported)."
[19]
With respect to the issue of the inherent distinctiveness of the trademarks in issue, the Chairman states:
"With respect to the inherent distinctiveness of the trademarks at issue, I consider that both the applicant's trademark 'Automax & Design' as applied to the wares and services covered in the applicant's application and the registered trademark 'Auto Maxi & Design' as applied to the wares covered in the opponent's registration possess some inherent distinctiveness when considered in their entireties although both trademarks include the element 'Auto' which clearly indicates that certain of the wares and services associated with the trademarks at issue are related to or are for use in association with automobiles. Further, the inherent distinctiveness of the registered trademark 'Auto Maxi & Design' is augmented by the design features which form an element of the trademark while the minor design features associated with the applicant's mark add little to its inherent distinctiveness."
[20]
As for the nature of the wares of the parties and the respective channels of trade associated with these wares, the Chairman states, on page 4 of his translated decision:
"I consider the opponent's automotive accessories, namely, headlights, rear lights, fog lights; automotive article carriers; automotive security devices; mirrors and wind deflectors to be clearly overlapping with the applicant's wares which could be used in automobiles, namely, antifreeze, windshield washer, batteries, air, oil and gas filters, fan belts, alternators, starters, water pumps, motor oil, transmission fluid and tires and the applicant's services relating to the operation of a business to distribute, retail and store automotive parts and accessories and vehicle repair services and the installation of automotive parts. On the other hand, there appears to be little similarity between the opponent's wares and the applicant's bicycles, sleeping bags and its services, with the exception of the services relating to automotive parts and accessories, vehicle repairs and the installing of automotive parts. Further, to the extent that the wares and services of the parties are overlapping, and in the absence of any evidence to the contrary, I consider the channels of trade associated with these wares and services would or could likewise overlap."
[21]
The Chairman then goes on to state:
"Considering the degree of resemblance between the trademarks at issue, I consider there to be some similarity in appearance and an even greater similarity in sounding between the trademarks 'Automax & Design' and 'Auto Maxi & Design' when considered in their entireties as a matter of first impression and imperfect recollection. Further, while both trademarks suggest that the respective wares and services of the parties are related to automobiles, I do not consider that either party would be entitled to a monopoly in respect of such an idea as applied to their respective wares and services which are for use in or are related to automobiles.
"In view of the above, I have concluded that the applicant has failed to meet the burden upon it of establishing that there would be no reasonable likelihood of confusion between its trademark 'Automax & Design' as applied to 'antigel, lave-glace, batteries, filtres à air, filtre à huile, filtres à essence, courroies de ventilateur, alternateurs, démarreurs, pompes à eau, liquid à moteur, huile de transmission, pneus' and its services identified as 'l'exploitation d'une entreprise traitant de distribution, de la vente au détail et d'opération de magasin offerts relativement à des pièces et accessoires automobiles; services de réparations de véhicules et d'installation de pièces automobiles' and the registered trademark 'Auto Maxi & Design'. On the other hand, I do not consider that there would be any reasonable likelihood of confusion between the opponent's trademark 'Auto Maxi & Design' and appliant's trademark 'Automax & Design' as applied to 'bicyclettes et sacs de couchage' or as applied to the applicant's services relating to 'l'exploitation d'une entreprise traitant de distribution, de la vente au détail et d'opération de magasin offerts relativement à des articles de quincaillerie et de peinture; articles et accessoires de sport; appareils et accessoires audio et vidéo; articles, ustensiles et accessoires de jardin; articles, ustensiles et accessoires de ménage et articles, ustensiles et accessoires de camping'. In this regard I would note the finding of the Federal Court, Trial Division, in respect of there being authority to render a split decision in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ."
[22]
As a result of the above, the Chairman refused the appellant's application "in respect of antigel, lave-glace, batteries, filtres à air, filtres à huile, filtres à essence, courroies de ventilateur, alternateurs. démarreurs, pompes à eau, liquide à moteur, huile de transmission, pneus" and in relation to the appellant's services, the Chairman also refused the appellant's application for "l'exploitation d'une entreprise traitant de distribution, de la vente au détail et d'opération de magasin offerts relativement à des pièces et accessoires automobiles; service de réparations de véhicules et d'installations de pièces automobiles".
[23]
The Chairman rejected the "opponent's" (respondent's) opposition to registration of the appellant's application in view of the provisions of s. 38(8) of the
Trade-marks Act
.
[24]
In effect, what the Chairman of the Trademarks Opposition Board did was to refuse the appellant's application to register the trademark 'Automax & Design' whenever it referred to any ware or service relating to a motor vehicle as same overlapped with the respondent's registered mark, in that, respondent's registered mark refers to automotive accessories. This notwithstanding the fact that the registration states:
"automotive accessories; namely, headlights, rear lights, fog lights;"
and then continues by stating, as possibly another category of wares:
"automotive article carriers, namely ..."
and then continues, as possibly another category of wares:
"automotive security devices, namely ..."
and then describes other specific wares such as:
"partitioning devices used for transporting animals; mirrors, wind deflectors, body mouldings and convertible roofs."
Affidavit Evidence
[25]
Although neither party filed any evidence before the Chairman, both the appellant and the respondent filed affidavit evidence for the hearing before me.
[26]
The appellant tendered evidence from Raymond L. Lemay who is the individual in charge of administration for the appellant. Mr. Lemay has been employed by appellant since 1983. He states that the appellant is the largest wholesaler of auto parts in Canada. He states that the appellant operates with four main divisions: (1) corporate wholesalers, (2) distribution, (3) industrial, and (4) in association with franchise stores.
[27]
Mr. Lemay states that, in 1986, in an attempt to enlarge its range of activities, the appellant commenced to use the mark "Automax" by which certain corporate stores and certain franchise stores could operate and be supplied by the appellant's distribution centre. It was and is as a result of these operating stores that the appellant made known the mark "Automax".
[28]
The appellant is associated, according to Mr. Lemay, with approximately 20 such stores who use the name Automax and who have filed applications to become registered users of the trademark "Automax".
[29]
I ask here how it is that the franchise store owners ask to become registered users of a trademark that is not yet a registered trademark? The fact that the franchise store owners have made a request to be registered users of the trademark "Automax & Design" adds little to the issue before me.
[30]
Nevertheless, what Mr. Lemay states in his affidavit is that these stores which have been using the mark "Automax" both on the outside of their premises and in the store itself have been doing so in the sale of auto parts and accessories and services since 1986 and have, as a result, made the mark known. In paragraph 17 of his affidavit, Mr. Lemay states:
"Les marchandises vendues, tant par les magasins corporatifs de l'époque que par les magasins associés sont principalement des pièces mécaniques, soit des pièces de moteurs, des freins, des amortisseurs, des pièces électriques, des lubrifiants et des liquides nécessaires au fonctionnement et à l'entretien d'un véhicule automobile;"
while he states in paragraph 19 that the respondent's wares are mainly related to the transport of sporting goods (racks) which produces have no relation to products used for the proper functioning of a motor vehicle (auto parts). He also states that this is confirmed by simply looking at the list of who are customers that purchase the respondent's products.
[31]
It is correct to say that Exhibit RL-6 indicates that respondent's customers are sporting goods shops and not shops that sell motor vehicle parts as generally sold by the appellant.
[32]
The appellant also filed the affidavit of Germain Faucher who is the President of Fo-Vel Inc. which is the owner of one of the appellant's franchise (associated) stores utilizing the mark "Automax". Fo-Vel is one of the companies which filed an application to become a registered user of the trademark "Automax", which as I have stated had not been registered.
[33]
Mr. Faucher states that Fo-Vel has been using the proposed trademark "Automax" as of June 12, 1990 which he alleges allows Fo-Vel "d'être reconnue à titre de commerce spécialisé dans la vente de pièces et d'accessoires automobiles" which sells auto parts such as mufflers, batteries, oil filters, oil and shock absorbers. In the area of auto accessories, Mr. Faucher states that he sells such items as bumpers, wheel covers, seat covers and paint to retouch a motor vehicle. Fo-Vel also provides services such as repairs to motor vehicles.
[34]
After having heard the submission of appellant's counsel, I believe that what I am to take from Mr. Faucher's affidavit is that the items sold by the appellant to Fo-Vel are very different from the items sold by the respondent and there cannot be any confusion as between "Automax" and "Auto Maxi". Yet, in paragraph 11 of his affidavit, Mr. Faucher himself confuses the two marks when he states:
"11. En fait, je n'ai pour ma part jamais entendu parler ni eu connaissance de l'existence de la marque 'Automaxi' et/ou 'Automax & Dessin';"
[35]
Counsel for the appellant states this is an error on the part of Mr. Faucher. It may be so, but no amended affidavit was produced. Counsel wanted to amend the affidavit at the hearing and not in the presence of Mr. Faucher. I disallowed the request for obvious reasons.
[36]
Another affidavit produced by appellant is one signed by Philippe Sirois, an employee of the appellant who is in charge of programs involving the appellant's associated stores. Mr. Sirois is an employee of the appellant since 1986 and he states that he personally visited each of the associated stores. He states that the items sold in these associated stores are principally mechanical and electrical parts, various types of lubricants for the proper functioning of these mechanical and electric parts. He also states that these stores provide maintenance and repair service for automobiles.
[37]
Appellant filed the affidavit of Pierre Lefebvre, the comptroller of the appellant. He states that in 1986, the Automax corporate stores sold, retail, a sum of approximately $2,177,190. For the year 1987 and for eight months into 1988, $3,225,027 and $1,775,184 respectively. He does not give any indication if any sales were made by the appellant's corporate Automax stores from September 1988 to February 5, 1992, the date he signed his affidavit.
[38]
Mr. Lefebvre does state in his affidavit that the Automax associated stores sales from 1989 to 1991 are approximately $632,381, $2,363,338 and $2,778,813.
[39]
I take this to indicate that the appellant before 1989, had no associated stores using the "Automax" mark.
[40]
The appellant also filed for my consideration two affidavits by Faïza Joakim, a legal assistant in the office of appellant's counsel.
[41]
In her first affidavit, Ms. Joakim states that on February 4, 1992, she photocopied certain exhibits attached to an affidavit signed by Guy George Lever relating to the opposition by the present appellant U.A.P. Inc. to an application for registration No. 615,831 for the trademark "Auto Maxi & Design" filed by Automaxi S.A.
[42]
The photocopies represent a catalogue of products carrying the trademark "Auto Maxi" and a list of clients of the exclusive Canadian distributor for Automaxi S.A.
[43]
What the photocopy of the catalogue photocopied by Ms. Joakim shows is that Automaxi S.A. sells roof rack systems for automobiles to carry skis, surf boards, bicycles and windsurfer boards. Automaxi S.A., according to the photocopies filed, also sells accessories for the roof rack carriers as well as a "Safari Roof Deck" a "Caravan Spoiler" and a "Dog Guard".
[44]
The list of customers for Automaxi S.A.'s exclusive distributor in Canada indicates, I believe without exception, to be sporting goods stores.
[45]
The second Joakim affidavit dated February 9, 1993, was filed during the hearing of the appeal over the objection of counsel for respondent. I overruled counsel for respondent's objection as the reason given for the objection appeared to me to be unsound. He objects, he states, because matters such as appeals from a Registrar are to proceed expeditiously. He also states that Federal Court Rule 704 fixes the time to file affidavits and that it is 15 days after the notice of appeal is filed.
[46]
I allowed the filing of the affidavit as I saw no prejudice being caused to the respondent. I was satisfied that it was in the interests of justice that the appellant be permitted to file evidence which was felt to be important. In addition, the filing of the affidavit caused no delay in the hearing.
[47]
Ms. Joakim's second affidavit states that counsel for the appellant had filed a request with the Registrar of Trademarks that the Registrar send to Automaxi S.A. a notice pursuant to s. 45 of the
Trade-marks Act
to cause Automaxi S.A. to make proof of use of the trademark "Auto Maxi & Design" registered under number 317,757.
[48]
After the registrar sent out the required notice pursuant to s. 45 to Automaxi S.A., Automaxi S.A. filed, as proof of use, the affidavit of Jean-Marie Ravier dated April 17, 1992 and the affidavit of Guy George Lever dated April 22, 1992, both of which affidavits were prepared for filing in the present appeal.
[49]
All this, I am told by counsel for the appellant to show that Automaxi S.A. is not and has not used in Canada the trademark and design as registered under number 317,757.
[50]
In fact, counsel for respondent admits that the respondent has not used, at least since 1992, the trademark and design
as registered
but has used the trademark "Auto Maxi".
[51]
I am not called upon to decide the s. 45 request. That issue is not before me and I make no comment with regard to that issue.
[52]
Counsel for the appellant also filed the affidavit of Pierre Reed who is the secretary and administrator of Reelem Sports Inc. which carries on business under the name of André Lalonde Sports. Mr. Reed states that the business of which he is secretary specializes in the sale of sporting articles involving the sport of hockey, cycling, sports involving racquets and others. He states he heard of products carrying the name "Auto Maxi" and that he knows of these products as being products for automobiles to carry skis, surf boards and bicycles.
[53]
Mr. Reed then states that his store or stores do not sell Auto Maxi products but he knows that the appellant U.A.P. Inc. (not Automax stores) specialize in the sale and distribution of automobile parts and that his stores do not sell nor distribute the same type of products carrying the trademark "Automax" and "Automax & Design".
[54]
He also states that his business does not sell automobile parts nor is he interested in doing so.
[55]
The evidence of this individual is virtually useless. All I get from this affidavit is that André Lalonde Sports stores belonging to Reelem Sports Inc. do not sell auto parts. Nor do they sell Auto Maxi products. Am I therefore to conclude that he does not sell Automaxi S.A. products because they are considered auto parts or automobile accessories? I will discuss this issue further in my decision.
[56]
The respondent filed the affidavits of Jean-Marie Ravier dated April 17, 1992, of Frank Haigh dated April 21, 1992 and of Guy George Lever dated April 22, 1992.
[57]
Mr. Jean-Marie Ravier is the Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of respondent. He states that commencing in 1983 the respondent began to use the trademark "Automaxi" on all products considered automotive accessories and that by 1987 Automaxi was used exclusively on all products. The trademark "Euromat" was previously used.
[58]
I take from this that the first use of the trademark "Automaxi" was in 1983 by the respondent. On the registration No. 317,757, Jacques Maby states the design mark was used in Canada since April 1982. I take from this that Jacques Maby first used the design mark in Canada in April 1982 and that the respondent first started to use "Automaxi" on its automobile accessories products as of 1983.
[59]
Mr. Ravier states that the respondent sells automotive accessories valued in excess of 100,000,000 French Francs each year around the world and that it had registered the trademark "Automaxi" in Great Britain, France, Canada, Japan, Sweden, Norway, Finland, Germany, Austria, Spain, Italy, Switzerland and the Benelux countries.
[60]
I have not seen a registration for the trademark "Automaxi" for Canada. The only registration filed was No. 317,757 for the design mark which shows two separate words "Auto Maxi" in the registered design.
[61]
Mr. Ravier has filed three exhibits with his affidavit. These exhibits represent the business of the respondent and the use of the word or words Auto Maxi.
[62]
Exhibit "A" to Mr. Ravier's affidavit is, as stated by Mr. Ravier in his affidavit, "a booklet entitled Automaxi Industries prepared in 1987 in contemplation of a reorganization of the corporation from a private corporation to a public corporation. The booklet describes the nature and operations of Automaxi as a car accessory stylist and the company remains true to that character to this day" (paragraph 7 of affidavit).
[63]
On the inside back cover of Exhibit "A" one sees "Automaxi in the World Automaxi Dans le Monde" and there appears a box with a Canadian flag and the words "Norvinca" and "Canada" underneath. This is the only reference to Canada in the booklet.
[64]
Insofar as marks are concerned, one sees the word Automaxi with Industries on the cover and a mark which can be referred to as a stylized A. Throughout the booklet, one can see the same stylized A mark or the word Automaxi. It would therefore appear to me that in 1987, the "Auto Maxi" design mark as registered in Canada was not in use. This basing myself solely on Exhibit "A".
[65]
Insofar as products manufactured and sold by the respondent in 1987 one can see ski racks, luggage carriers and other types of carriers for cars, related equipment as well as sun roofs.
[66]
Exhibit "B" to Mr. Ravier's affidavit is, as described by Mr. Ravier in paragraph 8 of his affidavit, "A booklet entitled Automaxi which is used by our distributors in Great Britain Auto Maxi Limited and it describes completely our products sold in Great Britain under the trademark 'Automaxi'." Exhibit 'C' is an Auto Maxi catalogue for 1992.
[67]
In Exhibit "B" Automaxi is one word. The products sold with the mark "Automaxi" are roof racks to carry various items such as skis, tires and surfboards. Such roof racks may have the word Automaxi on the rack as well as the stylized A; roof boxes with the word Automaxi on the box; ski accessories, straps, luggage elastics, sun roofs. The mark used on these products is either the stylized A or "Automaxi" or "Auto" with "Maxi" just underneath the word "Auto".
[68]
In the 1992 catalogue, basically the same products are shown, there are also rack alarm systems shown. The products carry the same marks as found in Exhibit "B" except that one sees "Automaxi" written "Auto Maxi" as two words rather than one.
[69]
It would appear that the respondent, at least since 1987, does not manufacture or sell "headlights, rear lights or fog lights". If respondent does sell these items, I cannot find any evidence of same.
[70]
Respondent filed the affidavit of Frank Haigh, who, as he states "engage myself in Industrial Property matters". He states that on April 18, 1992 he attended four Canadian Tire stores in the City of Ottawa. He also states that Canadian Tire "is a major Canadian retailing institution selling tools, hardware, plumbing equipment, home appliances and specializing in automotive parts and accessories".
[71]
Mr. Haigh produced a Canadian Tire 1992 Catalogue. Mr. Haigh then states, in paragraphs 5 and 6 of his affidavit:
"5. A brief description of the Contents of the magazine appears on page 3 and in that Contents there is reference to the pages in which automotive accessories appear. They appear on pages 168 to 171, 178 to 185 and 190 to 207.
"6. On pages 170 and 171 there are illustrations of automotive accessories designed for facilitating the carriage of luggage and sporting equipment on the top of automobiles."
[72]
It appears that for Canadian Tire Corporation, racks for the carrying of luggage and sporting equipment by motor vehicles (cars) are considered as automotive accessories.
[73]
The respondent also filed the affidavit of Guy George Lever, President of Revel Sports Corporation and which corporation has been the exclusive distributor in Canada for Automaxi S.A. since 1988. Mr. Lever filed two exhibits, Exhibit "A" is a catalogue entitled Automaxi Rack Systems. The catalogue shows the products sold by Revel Sport Corporation. Exhibit "B" is simply a mounting instruction leaflet.
[74]
Exhibit "A" shows that Revel sells Automaxi S.A.'s carrying rack systems with accessories as well as a Dog Guard, Caravan Spoiler and Safari Roof Deck. The mark found on the products is either Automaxi (one word) or the stylized A.
[75]
On Exhibit "B", one can see the stylized "A" with Automaxi immediately below.
[76]
In paragraph 5 of his affidavit, Mr. Lever states:
"Included amongst the respective outlets in Canada for automotive products is the Canadian Tire Corporation which is a major Canadian distributor of hardware, household gardening and automotive accessories."
[77]
I take this paragraph simply to mean that Canadian Tire Corporation outlets sell automotive products and, as well, are distributors of hardware, household, gardening and automotive accessories.
[78]
I do not know on what expertise Mr. Lever bases his statement. If I am to conclude from this statement, after reading the whole of the affidavit and the fact that Revel distributes Automaxi S.A. products across Canada, that Canadian Tire sells respondent's carriers and racks and advertises them under automotive accessories, with all due respect, I cannot do so. Nowhere in the Canadian Tire catalogue, under automotive accessories, can I find a single product being sold with the word or mark of the respondent.
[79]
I believe this statement to be purposely misleading. Mr. Lever speaks of distributing the respondent's products in excess of 400 retail outlets. I have no evidence from the Canadian Tire catalogue that Canadian Tire Corporation is one of the 400 outlets.
Issue
[80]
The sole issue to be determined is whether, in the light of all the evidence filed before me, the appellant satisfied the burden upon it of establishing that there would be no reasonable likelihood of confusion between its trademark "Automax" and "Automax & Design" as in its application for trademark Nos. 560,247 and 564,247 for the products and services stated in the applications and the respondent's registered trademark "Auto Maxi & Design" registered under No. 317,757 for the products stated therein.
[81]
The following are the trademarks in issue:
"
Marques de l'appellante
AUTOMAX
Demande numéro  Demande numéro
560,247     564,247
"
Marque de l'opposante
Numéro d'enregistrement 317,757"
Relevant Statutory Provisions:
[82]
For the purpose of this appeal, the relevant statutory provisions, as contained in the
Trade-marks Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. T-13, are as follows:
"Section 4. When Deemed To Be Used
(2) A trademark is deemed to be used in association with services if it is used or displayed in the performance or advertising of those services ...
"Section 6. When Mark Or Name Confusing
(1) For the purposes of this Act, a trademark or trade name is confusing with another trademark or trade name if the use of the first mentioned trademark or trade name would cause confusion with the last mentioned trademark or trade name in the manner and circumstances described in this section.
(2) Idem.- The use of a trademark causes confusion with another trademark if the use of both trademarks in the same area would be likely to lead to the inference that the wares or services associated with those trademarks are manufactured, sold, leased, hired or performed by the same person, whether or not the wares or services are of the same general class.
(3) Idem.- The use of a trademark causes confusion with a trade name if the use of both the trademark and trade name in the same area would be likely to lead to the inference that the wares or services associated with the trademark and those associated with the business carried on under the trade name are manufactured, sold, leased hired or performed by the same person, whether or not the wares or services are of the same general class.
(5)
What to be considered
.- In determining whether trademarks or trade names are confusing, the court or the Registrar, as the case may be, shall have regard to all the surrounding circumstances including
(a) the inherent distinctiveness of the trademarks or trade names and the extent to which they have become known;
(b) the length of time the trademarks or trade names have been in use;
(c) the nature of the wares, services or business;
(d) the nature of the trade; and
(e) the degree of resemblance between the trademarks or trade names in appearance or sound or in the ideas suggested by them.
"Section 37. When Application To Be Refused
(1) The Registrar shall refuse an application for the registration of a trademark if he is satisfied that
(a) the application does not conform to the requirements of s. 30.
(b) the trademark is not registrable, or
(c) the applicant is not the person entitled to registration of the trademark because it is confusing with another trademark for the registration of which an application is pending, and where the Registrar is not so satisfied, he shall cause the application to be advertised in the manner prescribed ...
"Section 38. Statement Of Opposition
(1) Within two months after the advertisement of an application for the registration of a trademark, any person may, on payment of the prescribed fee, file a statement of opposition with the Registrar. [1992, c. I, s. 134]
(2)
Grounds
.- A statement of opposition may be based on any of the following grounds:
(a) that the application does not conform to the requirements of s. 30;
(b) that the trademark is not registrable;
(c) that the applicant is not entitled to registration of the trademark; or
(d) that the trademark is not distinctive.
. . . . .
(5)
Substantial issue
.- If the Registrar considers that the opposition raises a substantial issue for decision, he shall forward a copy of the statement of opposition to the applicant.
(6)
Counter statement
.- Within the prescribed time after a statement of opposition has been forwarded to him, the applicant may file a counter statement with the Registrar and serve a copy on the opponent in the manner prescribed, and if he does not file and serve a counter statement within the prescribed time, he shall be deemed to have abandoned his application.
(7)
Evidence and hearing
.- Both the opponent and the applicant shall be given an opportunity, in the manner prescribed, to submit the evidence on which they rely and to be heard by the Registrar if they so desire.
(8)
Decision
.- After hearing the parties, if so required and considering the evidence, the Registrar shall refuse the application or reject the opposition and notify the parties of his decision and his reasons therefor.
"Section 56. Appeal
(1) An appeal lies to the Federal Court from any decision of the Registrar under this Act within two months from the date on which notice of the decision was dispatched by the Registrar or within such further time as the court may allow, either before or after the expiration of the two months.
(2)
Procedure
.- An appeal under subsection (1) shall be made by way of notice of appeal filed with the Registrar and in the Federal Court.
. . . . .
(5)
Additional evidence
.- On an appeal under subsection (1), evidence in addition to that adduced before the Registrar may be adduced and the Federal Court may exercise any discretion vested in the Registrar."
[83]
It is pursuant to s. 56(5) that both the appellant and respondent were permitted to file affidavit evidence notwithstanding the fact that neither the appellant nor the respondent filed any affidavit evidence before the Chairman.
Upon Whom The Onus To
Establish Confusion Rests
[84]
Before proceeding any further, it is important to note that although it is settled law that the Chairman's decision in respect of confusing trademarks and trade names is to be given weight and not set aside lightly, the reliance on the Registrar's decision must not go to the extent of relieving the judge hearing the appeal of his/her responsibility for determining the issue with due regard to all the relevant circumstances.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at pp. 199-200; also quoted by Dubé, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.) at p. 484.
[85]
On a s. 56 appeal, the onus is on the appellant to establish that the Registrar was wrong. Here the appellant need only establish that the Registrar had "gone wrong" and not that he was so wong as to warrant interference with his decision:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), at p. 71. However, in
M & K  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  a judicial determination on the question of whether or not the appellant's trade name is confusing with that of the respondent's trademark until it has been somehow first shown that the Registrar went wrong. Therefore, if the Registrar has gone wrong, it is open for me to substitute my conclusion for that of the Registrar.
[86]
However, while I have indicated that the onus is on the appellant to establish that the Registrar went wrong, in terms of the entitlement to registration, I note the following:
"The onus is upon the applicant for the registration of a trademark to establish his right thereto and that onus is constant upon him (see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at p. 35.)"
[87]
Therefore, in the present instance the onus was/is on the applicant (appellant) for registration to satisfy the Chairman that there is little likelihood of confusion between the proposed trademark and the trademark of the party filing the opposition. Notwithstanding, where a party files a statement of opposition, they must lead evidence which substantiates the pleadings contained therein.
Confusion
[88]
By statutory definition a trademark is confusing with another trademark, if its use on wares, services in the same area is likely to lead to the inference that the wares or services are manufactured, sold, leased, hired or performed by the same person, whether or not the wares or services are of the same general class (s. 6(3) of the
Act
).
[89]
Therefore, the preliminary issue I must determine is whether the trademark "Automaxi & Design" has been used by the respondent. Once it is established that there is use then the issue arises whether the use of the appellant's proposed trademark and design would be likely to lead to the inference, in the minds of consumers and business persons, that the wares and services associated with it and those associated with the respondent's trademark had a common source.
[90]
Section 6(5) of the
Act
outlines the circumstances which are to be considered in determining whether a trademark is confusing and provides that the court and the Registrar shall have regard to all the surrounding circumstances including:
(a) the inherent distinctiveness of the trademarks or trade names and the extent to which they have become known;
(b) the length of time the trademarks or trade names have been in use;
(c) the nature of the wares, services or business;
(d) the nature of the trade; and
(e) the degree of resemblance between the trademarks or trade names in appearance or sound or in the ideas suggested by them.
[91]
These criteria are not exhaustive and it is not necessary to find that all the circumstances exist, or exist to an equal degree (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 413 (F.C.A.) seems to indicate that the relevant date is the date of opposition. However, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 454 (T.D.), the court held that the date for determining whether any confusion exists was considered to be the date of filing the application. In the present case, the Chairman states, based on the
Park Avenue Furniture Corp.
case (supra) the date to be "as of the date of decision" which I take to be the date of the filing of the opposition. I see no reason to disagree with him.
Analysis And Discussion
[93]
After a review of the evidence, I am satisfied that there presently exists, for the purpose of the present hearing, a valid registration for a trademark and design for "Auto Maxi". This mark bears registration No. 317,757 and according to the certificate, the mark and design have been in use in Canada as of April 1982.
[94]
From the evidence filed before me by the respondent and from the admission made during the hearing, the registered mark of respondent, as it appears on the Certificate of Registration has not been used in Canada since 1987. I say 1987 because Exhibit "A" to the Ravier affidavit does not show use of the mark as it is registered in Canada. In addition, counsel for respondent makes the admission that the mark as registered was not used at least as of April 17, 1992, the date of the Ravier affidavit.
[95]
This registered mark is for the products listed on the Certificate of Registration. These products are automotive accessories; namely, headlights, rear lights, fog lights as well as other automotive accessories such as automotive article carriers and everything accessory to such carriers as well as automotive security devices, etc.
[96]
The appellant submits that the products and services for which it wants to use the mark "Automax" are very different from those of the respondent's wares.
[97]
There is no doubt that the respondent does not sell antifreeze, windshield washer fluid, batteries, oil filters, gas filters, air filters, fan belts, alternators, starters, water pumps, oil, transmission fluid and tires but the respondent does have the mark to use on headlights, rear lights and fog lights which are clearly automotive parts and accessories. Furthermore, the respondent does sell anti-theft devices and sirens, cables and security straps for use during towing, mirrors, wind deflectors, body mouldings and convertible roofs which are, as well, automotive parts and accessories.
[98]
I cannot agree with the submission that the appellant's products are different from that of respondent. Both are automotive accessories and parts. Only some of the specific products are different, such as motor oil, transmission fluid, etc., but all can be considered as automotive accessories.
[99]
This is also confirmed by the fact that Canadian Tire Corporation considers carrying racks and their accessories as being part of the larger category of automotive accessories.
Distinctiveness
[100]
As previously stated, the Chairman found that both the appellant's trademark "Automax & Design" as applied to the wares and services covered in the appellant's application and the registered trademark "Auto Maxi & Design" as applied to the wares covered in the respondent's registration possess some inherent distinctiveness when considered in their entireties "although both trademarks include the element Auto which clearly indicates that certain of the wares and services ... are related to or are for use in association with automobiles". The Chairman also found the "Auto Maxi & Design" mark is inherently distinctive because of its design feature - an automobile with driver in movement, while that of the appellant's design "add little to its inherent distinctiveness".
[101]
The appellant submits that the trademarks "Automax" and "Automax & Design" possess a high level of inherent distinctiveness in that both marks are composed of an invented expression. With regard to the trademark "Auto Maxi & Design", appellant submits it possesses a rather weak inherent distinctiveness, omitting the design feature, because:
"Quant à la marque de commerce 'Auto Maxi & Design' de l'opposante, celle-ci possède un caractère distinctif inhérent plutôt faible, exception faite de l'élément figuratif de cette marque, dans la mesure où l'on trouve d'une part le mot Auto décrivant ce sur quoi les marchandises de l'opposante sont installées et d'autre part le mot Maxi, lequel signifie 'maximal' et confère donc une connotation superlative à la qualité des marchandises de l'opposante. Définition du mot Maxi tirée du Petit Larousse Illustré 1990, Librairie Larousse, page 609 (onglet U)."
[102]
Appellant states that this is confirmed because on February 22, 1984 the respondent's representative wrote to the Registrar stating there would be no confusion between Auto Maxi and Maxi Auto (see Tab F of appellant's Book on Fact and Law).
[103]
The respondent submits that the respondent's trademark "Automaxi & Design" is inherently distinctive because it became "well-known in France, Europe and in Canada". Respondent alleges that the appellant's mark is not inherently distinctive because the trademarks "Automax" and "Automax & Design" are the subject of a proposed use application for wares but have been used for services as of 1986. Respondent submits that the automotive accessories, covered by appellant's applications, cover precisely the same goods of respondent.
[104]
Respondent also submits that the appellant's trademarks "while not precisely the identical ... possesses an extremely high degree of resemblance with respondent's trademark in appearance, sound and in the ideas suggested by them".
[105]
The question as to whether or not a trademark is distinctive is a question of fact.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 94 at pp. 109 and 110, I state:
"Actual distinctiveness is a question of fact. The
Act
provides in s. 2 that 'distinctive' in relation to a trademark means a trademark that actually distinguishes the wares or services, in association with which it is used by its owner, from the wares or services of others, or is adapted so as to distinguish them. In the case
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , it was stated that for a trademark to be distinctive of a person, the message to the public must be that such person is the source of the goods bearing the trademark."
[106]
Inherent distinctiveness refers to the inherent character or quality of the mark in question which may render the mark distinctive or nondistinctive.
[107]
I am satisfied that the Chairman was correct when he concluded that both the appellant's proposed trademarks and the respondent's mark were inherently distinctive notwithstanding the fact that the word Auto is found in the trademarks and that both marks are for wares related to automobiles. I am satisfied that the word "Max" in Automax and the word "Maxi" in Automaxi make the marks distinctive but the novel design of respondent's mark make it a strong mark, that is, it has a high degree of inherent distinctiveness when compared to the appellant's proposed design.
Confusion
[108]
As a general overview, I can do no better than to quote from the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 439. I would add at this point that a notice of appeal has been filed in that case. In relation to the issue of confusion of a trademark, Mr. Justice Cullen states at page 444:
"By statutory definition a trademark is confusing with another trademark, if its use on wares or services in the same area is likely to lead to the inference that the wares or services are manufactured, sold, leased, hired or performed by the same person, whether or not the wares or services are of the same general class: ss. 6(1) and (2) of the
Act
. The standard for determining whether the use of both trademarks in the same area
will likely
lead to the inference that the wares or services (in this case wares) associated with such trademarks are provided by the same person or have a common source is referred to in:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at p. 444; 18 C.I.P.R. 292; 12 A.C.W.S. (3d) 81 (F.C.T.D.). Section 6(5) of the
Act
outlines the circumstances which are to be considered in determining whether a trademark is confusing and provides that the court shall have regard to all the surrounding circumstances including:
(a) the inherent distinctiveness of the trademarks or trade names and the extent to which they have become known;
(b) the length of time the trademarks or trade names have been in use;
(c) the nature of the wares, services or business;
(d) the nature of the trade; and
(e) the degree of resemblance between the trademarks or trade names in appearance or sound or in the ideas suggested by them.
"These criteria are not exhaustive and it is not necessary to find that all the circumstances exist or that they exist to an equal degree:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 136; 9 F.T.F. 136; 11 C.I.P.R. 1 sub nom.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  involves a practical determination of fact and therefore each case stands on its own facts."
[109]
The Chairman of the Opposition Board found that most of the wares of the parties and the respective channels of trade associated with these wares clearly overlapped. He does say that there appears to be little similarity between the respondent's wares and the appellant's bicycles, sleeping bags and its services, with the exception of the services relating to automotive parts and accessories, vehicle repairs and the installing of automotive parts.
[110]
As I have previously stated, I do not agree that the appellant's wares are as different from that of respondent's, in that, the actual specific ware may be different but all wares are automotive parts and/or accessories. Confusion can easily arise in the mind of the ordinary consumer.
[111]
With the exception of Canadian Tire Corporation stores, the evidence indicates that the outlets for wares sold by the respondent would be sporting goods stores while the wares sold by the appellant would be stores that would normally be called auto parts stores. Nevertheless, some of the respondent's products, such as, convertible roofs, headlights, rear lights, fog lights, automotive security devices, cables and security straps used during towing, mirrors, wind deflectors and body mouldings could easily be sold in auto part stores as appellant's wares are sold.
[112]
Surely, one cannot deny that there is and could be an overlapping of sale outlets for both the appellant's wares and the respondent's. There can also be an overlapping for services as found by the Chairman although no evidence of any overlapping has been filed.
Length Of Time The Marks
Have Been In Use
[113]
No evidence of this was filed before the Chairman of the Opposition Board.
[114]
As previously stated, appellant's mark is a proposed mark for its wares and therefore has not been in use while the appellant's mark and design has been in use from 1986 for its services.
[115]
The respondent's mark and design have been in use, in Canada, according to the Certificate of Registration from April 1982.
[116]
As I have stated, the respondent has not used the mark and design as it is registered, in Canada, since at least April 1992 and possibly not since 1987 but the evidence is such that the respondent has used the mark "Automaxi" and "Auto Maxi" and the stylized A in Canada up to and including 1992.
[117]
In addition, until the registered mark is expunged, if it will be expunged for nonuse pursuant to s. 45, and I do not in any way state it should or should not be expunged, it is a valid and subsisting mark.
[118]
I am therefore satisfied that for the purpose of these proceedings the respondent has used "Auto Maxi & Design" for its wares in Canada from April 1982.
[119]
The appellant commenced to use "Automax" from 1986.
[120]
I am also satisfied that both the mark "Automax" and "Automax & Design" have become known, at least in the area of Montreal, in the Province of Quebec, where most of the Automax auto part stores are located. I am also satisfied from the evidence that respondent's products under the mark "Auto Maxi" are also known throughout Canada. Mr. Lever's evidence is that there are approximately 400 outlets throughout Canada selling the Auto Maxi product.
Degree Of Resemblance
[121]
The Chairman found there to be some similarity in appearance and an even greater degree of similarity in the "sounding" between the trademarks "Automax & Design" and "Auto Maxi & Design" when considered in their entireties "as a matter of first impression and imperfect recollection".
[122]
The appellant submits that from a visual perspective "la ressemblance entre les marques de l'appelante et la marque enregistrée de l'opposante est très faible".
[123]
I believe that all are in agreement that the visual similarity of the marks in issue is weak but nevertheless, I am satisfied, as was the Chairman, that a similarity does exist. When one quickly views the design mark "Automax" with the design mark "Auto Maxi" I am satisfied that one can conclude that there exists a similarity.
[124]
Appellant suggests that from a phonetic viewpoint the two marks are substantially different and this because appellant's mark contains one expression with three syllables while respondent's mark contains two words with two syllables.
[125]
I do not agree with counsel's submission. I am satisfied that the Chairman was correct when he states that in considering the matter of similarity, one must consider "first impression and imperfect recollection". When one views the two marks with an imperfect recollection "Automax" and "Auto Maxi" are very similar.
Conclusion
[126]
The evidence does not show any actual confusion in the minds of the public. This does not mean that there could not be any confusion in the minds of the public if both the appellant and the respondent were to be allowed to use the trademarks in the manner applied for.
[127]
I am satisfied that the Chairman of the Opposition Board was correct when he concluded that the appellant has failed to meet the burden upon it that there would be
no reasonable likelihood of confusion
between its mark and that of the respondent.
[128]
The appeal is denied with costs in favour of the respondent.
[129]
There is one more issue to deal with. In the Reply filed by the respondent to the notice of appeal, the respondent, under the title "Grounds", states, at para. 13:
"13. Insofar as the learned Chairman of the Opposition Board bifurcated application Nos. 564,247 'Automax & Design' and 560,247 'Automax' into separate parts accepting one part and rejecting the other he erred because he had no jurisdiction to separate an application on which he was adjudicating into separate parts."
[130]
Counsel for the respondent now states that this paragraph, a listed "Ground" submitted in Reply is really an appeal or cross-appeal to the decision of the Chairman insofar as it relates to the bifurcation of application Nos. 564,247 and 560,247.
[131]
I dismissed this submission.
[132]
Section 56 of the
Trade-marks Act
clearly states that an appeal under the
Act
lies within
two
months from the date on which the notice of a decision was dispatched or within a further time as the court may allow and it shall be made by way of Notice of Appeal.
[133]
A Reply to a notice of appeal
is not
a notice of appeal.
[134]
The Chairman's decision is dated October 31, 1991. The respondent's Reply is dated March 31, 1992. No application was made by counsel for respondent to extend the delays to file a notice of appeal. Surely counsel for respondent agrees that more than two months have elapsed from the date when the Chairman handed down his decision. I find it most disturbing when counsel
insists
that his reply was and is an appeal from the decision of the Chairman when it would be obvious that this submission is in error had counsel bothered to read s. 56 which, once again, states:
"56(1) An appeal lies to the Federal Court from any decision of the Registrar under this Act within two months from the date on which notice of the decision was dispatched by the Registrar or within such further time as the court may allow, either before or after the expiration of the two months."
Appeal dismissed.
Editor: Janette Blue/sms
[End of document]