[1]
Cullen, J.
: The style of cause in this case will be amended to indicate the Minister of Citizenship and Immigration as respondent.
[2]
This is an application for judicial review, pursuant to leave granted by Mr. Justice Gibson, of a decision of the Refugee Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board ("the Board"), dated September 28, 1993, in which it determined that the applicant, a citizen of Iran, was not a Convention refugee within the meaning of s. 2(1) of the
Immigration Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2, as amended ("the
Act
").
Facts
[3]
The Board found the applicant not to be a credible witness and pointed to a number of implausibilities and inconsistencies in his testimony. Many of the facts which follow, adduced from the applicant's Personal Information Form and oral testimony, are disputed by the Board.
[4]
The applicant is a 26 year old citizen of Iran. He claims to have a well-founded fear of persecution based on his political opinion.
[5]
The applicant testified that his political awareness began in high school. At that time, an anti-government group was formed at his school, although the members asserted very different political ideologies. His political activities were two-fold: the applicant distributed anti-government literature produced by different groups and he spoke out against the government at his workplace. The distribution of pamphlets took place at night, between midnight and 2:00 a.m., in apartment buildings.
[6]
In April 1988, the applicant was arrested and detained for three weeks. Upon his release, his family moved to another neighbourhood for greater security. The applicant testified that he purchased a photocopy machine so that he could more efficiently continue his anti-government activities.
[7]
In December 1991, some members of his political group were arrested. The applicant fled to a friend's house and remained in hiding for six months. In April or May, 1992, one of the group members was executed. The claimant fled from Iran.
The Board's Decision
[8]
At the outset of its reasons, the Board stated that it began with the assumption that testimony given under oath is true. However, having reviewed the totality of the evidence, the Board found that there was reason to doubt the truthfulness of the applicant's statements. The applicant was given an opportunity to clarify the implausible evidence, but no satisfactory explanation was provided. With respect to the findings of credibility and plausibility, the Board stated:
"The panel finds it implausible that in a society as repressive as the Iranian society, where anti-government activity is severely punished and must therefore take place in the utmost secrecy and in a highly organized fashion, that the claimant,
1. was part of a group that was politically mixed, unfocussed and amateurish;
2. himself did not belong to a political party;
3. knew the groups that his friends belonged to;
4. was able to carry pamphlets in a zipped gym bag and distribute 200 to 500 such pamphlets between 12 a.m. and 2 a.m. for seven years;
5. would spout his anti-government views to colleagues at work when mere distribution of anti-government literature invited execution;
6. would, without any firm ideological convictions and with but a vague, ill-defined dislike of the government, invest so much time in risking so much;
"The claimant was also inconsistent about the time he learnt of the arrests of two of his friends, Reza Arshadi and Mustaffa Azali, who helped him in his political activities. At one point he stated that he learned of their arrest the same night it occurred and then almost immediately afterwards said that it was the following afternoon. His PIF, however, stated that Reza Arshadi was arrested later on.
"Because of these implausibilities and inconsistencies the panel does not find the claimant to be a credible witness who has given credible and trustworthy information with respect to his claim."
The Board concluded that the applicant was not a Convention refugee.
Issue
[9]
It is necessary for me to determine whether the Board erred in finding that the applicant was not credible and, thereby, did not have a well-founded fear of persecution.
Analysis And Application To
The Case At Bar
[10]
It is trite law to state that findings of credibility are the purview of the Board and a reviewing court should be hesitant in interfering. The standard of judicial review for credibility findings was summarized by Jerome, A.C.J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.):
"The jurisprudence has established the standard of review in cases of this nature. To begin with, questions of credibility and weight of evidence are within the jurisdiction of the Refugee Division as the trier of facts in respect of Convention refugee claims. When a tribunal's impugned finding relates to the credibility of a witness, the court will be reluctant to interfere with that finding, given the tribunal's opportunity and ability to assess the witness, his demeanour, frankness, readiness to answer, coherence and consistency in oral testimony before it. As stated by the Federal Court of Appeal in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  credibility and weight are matters particularly within the Board's jurisdiction to decide.'
" <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  opinion, the points argued by counsel for the applicant raise only questions of credibility and of the weight of evidence and afford no legal basis upon which this court could properly interfere with the decision of the Immigration Appeal Board.'
"Furthermore, the Refugee Division is entitled to make an adverse finding of credibility based on the implausibility of an applicant's story, provided the inferences drawn can be reasonably said to exist. Negative findings with respect to an individual's credibility are properly made, provided the tribunal gives reasons for its decision in clear and unequivocal terms."
[11]
Despite the degree of discretion granted to the Board in assessing credibility, the Board has an obligation to express any negative finding of credibility in "clear and unmistakeable terms" (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R.(2d) 199 (F.C.A.)). This generally includes the obligation to give examples or illustrations of the basis for not accepting the applicant's testimony: (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), Décary, J., considered the standard of review in cases where the Board had found parts of a claimant's testimony implausible. In doing so, the court clarified the principles set out in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.):
"It is correct, as the court said in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> that it may be easier to have a finding of implausibility reviewed where it results from inferences than to have a finding of noncredibility reviewed where it results from the conduct of the witness and from inconsistencies in the testimony. The court did not, in saying this, exclude the issue of the plausibility of an account from the Board's field of expertise, nor did it lay down a different test for intervention depending on whether the issue is 'plausibility' or 'credibility'.
"There is no longer any doubt that the Refugee Division, which is a specialized tribunal, has complete jurisdiction to determine the plausibility of testimony: who is in a better position than the Refugee Division to gauge the credibility of an account and to draw the necessary inferences? As long as the inferences drawn by the tribunal are not so unreasonable as to warrant our intervention, its findings are not open to judicial review. In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the court merely observed that in the area of plausibility, the unreasonableness of a decision may be more palpable, and so more easily identifiable, since the account appears on the face of the record. In our opinion, <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> in no way reduces the burden that rests on an appellant, of showing that the inferences drawn by the Refugee Division could not reasonably have been drawn."
In summary, it is clear that the reviewing court should refuse to interfere with decisions which assess credibility or plausibility, provided that the decisions are properly founded on evidence, did not ignore evidence, or are supported by evidence.
[13]
After having carefully examined the reasons of the Board in the present case, I am not satisfied it considered and weighed all of the evidence adduced by the applicant. Specifically, I am troubled by the Board's initial statement that although Iran is a repressive society and severely punishes opposition, only highly-organized movements can exist. In essence, the Board seems to have decided what kinds of opposition groups could exist, and accordingly, that it was implausible that anyone who did not fit the specifics could exist. Once the Board set up the "test" for the kinds of political opposition groups that could exist in Iran, the applicant's evidence which did not fit the Board's "ideal" was found not to be credible. I agree with the applicant that the Board set up a kind of "straw man" which it later shot down.
[14]
When considering grounds of persecution, it is important for the Board to consider the matter from the perspective of the persecutor. By setting up such a narrow test for the kinds of political groups that could exist, the Board only considered how it would look at the issue. However, the Board's perceptions are secondary to the perceptions of the persecutory agents. If the government of Iran would have considered that the applicant was the member of a banned opposition group -- regardless of whether is was highly-organized or not -- it is their opinion, and not that of the Board, which must govern. In
Re Inzunza and Minister of Employment and Immigration
(1979), 103 D.L.R.(3d) 105, at p. 109 (F.C.A.), this point was made clear:
"In light of this conclusion, I do not need to deal with the allegation that the Board erred in its interpretation of 'political activities', other than to say that the
crucial test in this regard should not be whether the Board considers that the applicant engaged in political activities, but whether the ruling government of the country from which he claims to be a refugee considers his conduct to have been styled as political activity
." (emphasis added)
Regardless of the ground of persecution, the question should be approached from the perspective of the persecutor. Not to do so is an error of law.
[15]
Moreover, as the applicant pointed out in his oral arguments before me, some of the Board's findings of credibility were either not established by the evidence or misconstrued the evidence. Although these errors alone might not be sufficient to overcome the heavy burden placed on the applicant in challenging credibility findings, when combined with the overall approach that the Board adopted, the errors are inexcusable.
[16]
This application for judicial review is allowed and the matter referred back to a differently constituted Board.
Application granted.
Editor: Reginald W. Curtis/saf
[End of document]