 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
Federal Court
Preston, Assessment Officer
March 24, 2011.
Counsel:
Joseph Herbert, on his own behalf;
Kathryn Hucal, for the respondent.
Solicitors of Record:
Myles J. Kirvan, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, for the respondent.
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary. Any footnotes found in this case will appear below end of document.
[1]
Preston, Assessment Officer
: By way of order dated June 22, 2010 the Court dismissed the application for judicial review with costs.
[2]
The Respondent filed its Bill of Costs on November 5, 2010.
[3]
On November 10, 2010, a Direction setting a schedule for the exchange of materials was issued. The Applicant files written costs submissions and the Respondent filed the Affidavit of Lisa Minarovich and written submissions in rebuttal. As both parties have filed submissions as to cost, I will proceed with the assessment.
[4]
Concerning the award of costs, the Applicant submits that the discretionary power under Rule 400 of the
Federal Courts Rules
should be exercised and that no costs should be awarded.
[5]
In reply, the Respondent submits that the Applicant's submission primarily focus on whether costs should be awarded. Counsel contends:
Clearly that issue has been determined by the Court in its order of costs and there is no revisiting that order absent an appeal which was not filed in this case.
[6]
I will address this point prior to proceeding with the assessment.
[7]
I am in agreement with the Respondent. Given the order of June 22, 2010, the Applicant's request must fail as the costs have already been awarded by the Court. It has been held several times that Assessment Officers are not members of the  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). Therefore, even though I have jurisdiction to decide which items of costs are to be allowed and their quantum, I have no jurisdiction to usurp the discretion to award costs, vested in the Court by Rule 400(1) (see:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[8]
Continuing with the Applicant's submissions, he relies on Rule 400(3)(e) any written offer to settle; Rule 400(3)(h) whether the public interest in having the proceeding litigated justifies a particular award of costs; and Rule 400(3)(i) any conduct of a party that tended to shorten or unnecessarily lengthen the duration of the proceeding.
[9]
Having regard to the offer to settle the Applicant submits that in December 2009 he sent the Respondent a formal offer to settle and entered into discussions to resolve the matter. The Applicant further contends that the parties were able to resolve everything except the applicants actual discharge date from the RCMP.
[10]
The Respondent made no submissions concerning the offer to settle.
[11]
Upon reviewing the Court's order dated June 22, 2010, at paragraph 9 the Court held that the Applicant's specific discharge date and period of pensionable service were not properly raised in these proceedings. Further at paragraph 10 of the Order, the Court held:
On December 14, 2009, after the Applicant initiated these proceedings, the Minister revoked the decision that was the subject of these proceedings and set aside the Applicant's deemed pension option. Applicant has therefore obtained the relief sought in his Notice of Application and MOFL, and contemplated by section 14 of the Regulations, rendering these proceedings moot.
[12]
Although the Applicant has raised the offer to settle as an issue, the Court's finding that the proceeding was moot actually supports the Respondent's position on costs. As a result, I find that the offer to settle has no bearing on the quantum of costs to be allowed in this matter.
[13]
Concerning public interest, the Applicant submits that there is no public interest in this litigation that justifies a particular award of costs. Once again, the Respondent made no submissions concerning this issue.
[14]
The Applicants submission concerning public interest seems to suggest that public interest cases justify higher costs. This argument is contrary to the jurisprudence, which generally finds public interest to be justification for lower costs (see:  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). Given the Applicants submission, I find that a lack of public interest, has no bearing on the quantum of costs to be allowed in this matter.
[15]
With respect to conduct that unnecessarily lengthened the proceeding the Applicant argues:
The Applicant believes that this matter could have been resolved much sooner if the Respondent would have shown any interest and /or initiative to resolve the matter in the preceding five months before the Minister revoked his decision and the Applicant made an offer to settle. It is even further troubling when part of the Respondent's costs claimed is for an uncontested motion for an extension of time so that the Respondent could submit materials for the first time some five months after this application was made.
[16]
Although the Respondent made no submissions concerning this issue, counsel did contend:
In terms of quantum sought the Applicant only contests the claim for the costs of an uncontested motion for an extension of time, implying it was required because of the Respondent's neglect or inattentiveness. In fact the extension was required because the Respondent had been engaged in settlement negotiations with the Applicant which ultimately failed after 5 months.
[17]
It is clear from the fact that the Respondent required an extension of time to file materials that the proceeding was subject to some delay; however, I am in agreement with the Respondent that any undue lengthening of the proceeding is attributable to the unsuccessful attempt to settle this matter. Once again, given the Court's finding that the proceeding was moot, any undue delay relating to the offer to settle could be seen to support the Respondent's claim, not the Applicants position. On the other hand, given my finding that the offer to settle had no effect on the quantum of costs, it would follow that the delay caused by the offer would not have any impact on the costs in this matter.
[18]
Turning to the Bill of Costs, the only item challenged by the Applicant is the Respondent's motion for an extension of time. The Respondent has claimed 2 units under Item 4. The Applicant submits that it is troubling that the Respondent claimed costs for a motion for an extension of time so that the Respondent could submit materials five months after this application was made.
[19]
As indicated in paragraph 15 above, the Respondent submits that the motion for an extension was required because the Respondent had been engaged in settlement negotiations with the Applicant.
[20]
Although I am in agreement with the Respondent as to the circumstances which necessitated the motion for an extension of time, the Respondent's claim cannot be allowed. The order dated February 3, 2010, granting the motion for an extension of time, makes no mention of an award of costs to the Respondent. It has been held many time that absent an exercise of discretion by the Court, an Assessment Officer, who is not a member of the Court, has no jurisdiction to allow costs of a motion (see:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). Therefore, the Respondent's claim under Item 4 is not allowed.
[21]
For the same reasons, it follows that the Respondent's Disbursement to Avanti Paralegal for filing of the Motion for Extension of Time, cannot be allowed. Therefore, the claim for Invoice #56 in the amount of $36.86 is not allowed.
[22]
Concerning the remaining counsel fees, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> the assessment officer held:
"Effectively, the absence of any relevant representations by the Plaintiff, which could assist me in identifying issues and making a decision, leaves the bill of costs unopposed. My view, often expressed in comparable circumstances, is that the
Federal Courts Rules
do not contemplate a litigant benefiting by an assessment officer stepping away from a position of neutrality to act as the litigant's advocate in challenging given items in a bill of costs. However, the assessment officer cannot certify unlawful items, i.e. those outside the authority of the judgment and the Tariff."
[23]
Although not raised by the Applicant, I am not able to allow the Respondent's claim under Item 15, preparation and filing of written argument,
where requested or permitted by the Court
(emphasis added). It has been decided on many occasions that unless there is a specific order or direction of the Court requesting written submissions, Item 15 cannot be allowed (see:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). Having reviewed the file, I can find no such direction of the Court; consequently the Respondents claim under Item 15 is not allowed.
[24]
Under Item 28 the Respondent has claimed one half of one unit for the services of a paralegal for the preparation of the Bill of Costs. In the normal course of an assessment, this would not be allowed as services related to the assessment of costs are claimed under Item 26. However, the Respondent has not submitted a claim under Item 26. Therefore, in the circumstances of this particular assessment, I allow Item 28 as claimed as it is a lesser amount than could have been claimed under Item 26 and therefore does not prejudice the Applicant.
[25]
As mentioned earlier, the Applicant has not contested the amounts claimed for the remaining Items and disbursements. Having reviewed the Bill of Costs, the Order of the Court, the Affidavit of Disbursements of Lisa Minarovich and the written submissions filed by the parties, I find that the fees claimed under Items 2, 13 and 14 and the remaining disbursements claimed fall within the authority of the Order of the Court and Tariff B of the
Federal Courts Rules.
As I also find them to be reasonable and necessary for the conduct of the proceeding, they are allowed as claimed in the Bill of Costs.
[26]
Finally, as the legislation creating a requirement to pay HST came into force on July 1, 2010 and the final decision awarding costs predated the coming into force, the HST claimed for assessable services is not allowed.
[27]
For the above reasons, the Respondent's Bill of Costs is assessed and costs are allowed at $2,804.98.
[End of document]