[1]
Beaudry, J.
[Translation]: This is an application for judicial review pursuant to s. 18 of the
Federal Court Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7, from a decision by a regional recovery officer of the Canada Employment Insurance Commission ("the Commission"), Sylvain Borduas. In his decision of March 19, 2001, that officer denied a request to write off an amount which the plaintiff had to pay to the Department of Human Resources Development Canada. The plaintiff owed that amount as an overpayment of employment insurance benefits.
Point at Issue
[2]
Should the Federal Court intervene in the Commission's decision on March 19, 2001?
[3]
I answer this question in the affirmative, for the reasons that follow.
Factual Background
[4]
On September 2, 1997, the plaintiff went to the Commission office in Ville-Marie to file an application for employment insurance benefits. He stated he had been laid off since August 29, 1997, by the company 9044-4902 Québec Inc., known as "Les services d'entretien Roy" ("the company").
[5]
In preparing his application the plaintiff gave the Commission a record of employment indicating that the date of his return to work was unknown. He prepared his application with the help of a Commission clerk on a standard form.
[6]
The document titled "Application for Unemployment Insurance" (hereinafter "the application") indicates in question No. 27:
"Are you
NOW
working for an employer? - x No - o Yes"
(The capitalized bold face text is reproduced as it appears in the document submitted)
[7]
On September 4, 1997 the plaintiff was called back to work. The company had hired the plaintiff's daughter to perform the duties of housekeeper at a school on September 2. After two days she ceased work because of the work schedule.
[8]
On September 12, 1997 the plaintiff went to the Commission office to complete the preliminaries for obtaining benefits. On that visit he asked another clerk if he could work while he was receiving benefits. The clerk told him that he could receive up to 25 per cent of the amount of benefits without their being reduced. She told him that the amount of the earnings in the first two weeks would be deducted in full from his first benefit cheque.
[9]
Following the advice received from the clerk, the plaintiff completed a benefit card and indicated every day on which he received income. On September 12 it can be seen that the plaintiff was paid for September 2, 3, 4 and 5, 1997, and for September 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12. It should be noted that for the days of September 2 and 3, the plaintiff was paid but did not work (see the plaintiff's affidavit, paragraph 13).
[10]
The plaintiff subsequently received benefits and reported the earnings which he made during the time he was receiving those benefits.
[11]
The plaintiff received no further communication from the Commission until his next application.
[12]
On September 24, 1998, the plaintiff filed another application for benefits. He indicated a layoff as of September 18, 1998, due to lack of work and that his date of return to work was unknown. However, he did part-time work for the company in the two weeks following the date of his application, relying again on the advice he received the previous year from the Commission clerk.
[13]
In 1999 the plaintiff became a 33 per cent shareholder in the company. He asked the Commission clerk if he could still receive employment insurance benefits, in view of his increased share in the company and the seasonal nature of the business it operated.
[14]
Following that request, the defendant conducted an investigation into the plaintiff and decided to cancel the two benefit periods, that beginning on August 31, 1997, and that which began on September 20, 1998. Further, the defendant asked the plaintiff to repay the benefits during the two periods in question on the ground that there was no work stoppage for at least seven consecutive days before each of the benefit periods began.
[15]
Gilles Labrie communicated the decisions to the plaintiff on the Commission's behalf on September 8, 1999.
[16]
The plaintiff challenged these decisions before a board of referees pursuant to Part IV of the
Employment Insurance Act
, S.C. 1996, c. 23 (hereinafter "the
Act
").
[17]
In its decision of October 18, 1999, the board of referees dismissed the plaintiff's appeal and stated that it had to apply the regulations, which required a work stoppage lasting seven consecutive days. In particular, the board of referees further indicated, at p. 6:
[Translation] "
The board of referees considers that the claimant received false and misleading information from the agent at the Ville-Marie office and finds the claimant credible
..." (My emphasis)
[18]
Following this disputed decision the umpire, Guy Goulard, dismissed the appeal from the board of referees' decision on September 22, 2000, and mentioned:
[Translation] "
I must therefore dismiss the appeal, but I will take the liberty of recommending that the Commission examine the possibility of an overpayment write-off, in whole or in part, or at least negotiate with the claimant more reasonable repayment terms based on the fact that the Commission's errors were responsible for what has become a very difficult situation for Mr. Roy
..." (My emphasis)
[19]
Following that decision Mr. Borduas, representing the defendant, contacted Mr. Roy on March 19, 2001, and indicated that the Commission could not write off the debt as none of the requirements set out in s. 56 of the
Employment Insurance Regulations
, SOR/96-332 (hereinafter "the
Regulations
") were applicable. He suggested to him that, in view of his family, professional and financial circumstances, he would suffer no undue loss by spreading the repayment of his claim over a period of time rather than requiring immediate repayment. As an example, he suggested that his mortgage loan be increased to partially liquidate the debt and repay the balance by monthly installments of $200.
[20]
That decision is now challenged in this Court.
[21]
Before hearing the arguments, I submitted to counsel for the parties the recent judgment by my colleague Tremblay-Lamer, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
Analysis
[22]
Section 56 of the relevant
Regulations
is as follows:
"Write-off of Benefits Wrongly Paid
"56(1) A penalty owing under section 38, 39 or 65.1 of the Act or
an amount owing under section 43
, 45, 46, 46.1 or 65 of the Act
may be written off by the Commission
if
(a) the total of the penalties and amounts owing by the debtor does not exceed $5 and a benefit period is not currently running in respect of the debtor;
(b) the debtor is deceased;
(c) the debtor is a discharged bankrupt;
(d) the debtor is an undischarged bankrupt in respect of whom the final dividend has been paid and the trustee has been discharged;
(e) the overpayment does not arise from an error made by the debtor or as a result of a false or misleading declaration or representation made by the debtor, whether the debtor knew it to be false or misleading or not, but arises from
(i) a retrospective decision or ruling made under Part IV of the Act, or
(ii) a retrospective decision made under Part I or IV of the Act in relation to benefits paid under section 25 of the Act; or
(f)
the Commission considers that, having regard to all the circumstances
,
(i) the penalty or amount is uncollectable, or
(ii) the repayment of the penalty or amount would result in undue hardship to the debtor.
"(2)
That portion of an amount owing under section 47 or 65 of the Act in respect of benefits received more than 12 months before the Commission notifies the debtor of the overpayment may be written off by the Commission if
(a) the overpayment does not arise from an error made by the debtor or as a result of a false or misleading declaration or representation made by the debtor, whether the debtor knew it to be false or misleading or not; and
(b) the overpayment arises as a result of
(i)
a delay or error made by the Commission in processing a claim for benefits
,
(ii) retrospective control procedures or a retrospective review initiated by the Commission,
(iii) an error made on the record of employment by the employer,
(iv) an incorrect calculation by the employer of the debtor's insurable earnings or hours of insurable employment, or
(v) an error in insuring the employment or other activity of the debtor." (emphasis added)
[23]
The defendant submitted that the plaintiff had allowed the Commission to believe that he had been the subject of the work stoppage required for qualification. Even if that statement was made in good faith, the plaintiff received benefits contrary to the
Act
as the evidence actually showed that he had worked and/or been paid during the period covered in the
Regulations
, thereby prohibiting benefits.
[24]
The defendant further argued that write-off is an exceptional measure and it was his decision (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  the defendant maintained that the standard of review when the Commission refused to allow a write-off was that of the patently unreasonable decision.
[25]
The defendant added that in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), Richard, J. (as he then was), adopted the language of Cory, J., in
CUPE No. 2
[
Canadian Union of Public Employees, Local 963 v. New Brunswick Liquor Corp.
, [1979] 2 S.C.R. 227; 26 N.R. 341; 25 N.B.R.(2d) 237; 51 A.P.R. 237; 97 D.L.R.(3d) 417; 79 C.L.L.C. 14,209], at 763  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> :
"
It is not enough that the decision of the Board is wrong in the eyes of the court; it must, in order to be patently unreasonable, be found by the court to be clearly irrational
." (My emphasis)
[26]
Further, in its discretion the Commission does not have to take the statements or recommendations by the umpire or the board of referees into account.
[27]
Counsel for the plaintiff, for his part, placed great emphasis on his client's credibility and on the fact that the board of referees and the umpire found Mr. Roy credible, and that it was due to the Commission error that he had received the overpayments.
[28]
He cited
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 192 N.R. 148 (F.C.A.), in which Robertson, J., said at 4:
"Counsel for the Commission acknowledges that a discretionary power must be exercised 'judicially'. I take that term to mean that if it can be established that the decision-maker acted in bad faith or for an improper purpose or motive, took into account an irrelevant factor
or ignored a relevant factor
or acted in a discriminatory manner, then any decision which flows from the exercise of a discretionary power will be set aside ..." (My emphasis)
[29]
The plaintiff further argued that <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra should be applied in the case at bar, that is, the statements of fact accepted by the board of referees and the umpire cannot be disregarded when the Commission makes its decision, as the board of referees and the umpire hear and admit the evidence of the parties, while the Commission, when it decides whether to write off, does not have that opportunity (see paragraph 13 of <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[30]
Mr. Roy further added that he was acting in good faith at all times and relied on the advice of Commission employees, and it was he who asked whether he could still receive benefits in view of his increased participation in the company. It was not until after this request that the Commission investigated and decided not to write off the overpayment.
Analysis
[31]
In the case at bar the board of referees ruled that Mr. Roy received false and misleading information and found the claimant credible. The umpire recommended that the Commission examine the possibility of an overpayment write-off and added that it was the Commission's mistakes which were responsible for what had become a very difficult situation for Mr. Roy.
[32]
In analyzing Mr. Borduas' affidavit, I note that he said at paras. 17, 24 and 25:
[Translation] "17. In the circumstances, I have concluded that the overpayment resulted from a situation in which the Commission could not be blamed;
. . . . .
"24. Accordingly, in the circumstances of the instant case I have concluded that payment of the overpayment
did not result from a mistake by the Commission
;
"25. In any event, even if wrong information was given to the plaintiff at his visit to the employment centre about ten days after he made his application, it
cannot be said that the wrong information was the sole cause of the overpayment since the information supplied by the plaintiff in his benefit application was misleading and also contributed to payment of the overpayment
..." (My emphasis)
[33]
First, I note that the decision-maker did not accept the finding of fact by the board of referees and the umpire, but contradicted them on the question of the Commission's mistake.
[34]
Further, in his decision of March 19, 2001, Mr. Borduas nowhere indicated that he took the plaintiff's good faith or credibility into account.
[35]
I have therefore come to the conclusion that the decision-maker ignored a relevant factor ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra). In my view, he also did not exercise his discretion judicially (see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 229 N.R. 42 (F.C.A.)).
[36]
For these reasons, the application for judicial review is allowed and the matter is referred back to the Commission for re-consideration (by another decision-maker), taking into account the findings of fact made by the board of referees and the umpire that the plaintiff was credible and that this unfortunate incident was due to a mistake by the Commission.
ORDER
[37]
THE COURT ORDERS that:
1. the application for judicial review be allowed;
2. the matter be referred back to the Commission for re-consideration (by another decision-maker), taking into account the findings of fact made by the board of referees and the umpire that the plaintiff was credible and that this unfortunate incident was due to a mistake by the Commission.
Application allowed.
Editor: Angela E. McKay/clh