[1]
Richard, J.
: This is an appeal by the plaintiff, Claude Robinson, from an order of the prothonotary striking out the statement of claim as against the individual defendants on the ground that this court has no jurisdiction to adjudicate the claims made against them personally. The order of the prothonotary is accompanied by reasons. Both parties agree that the action against the Crown is properly before this court by virtue of s. 3(1) of the
Crown Liability and Proceedings Act
, S.C. 1990, c. 8.
[2]
The plaintiff, an inmate of the Edmonton Institution, a federal penitentiary, filed a statement of claim in this court on June 18, 1993. The individual defendants are all officers, employees, servants and agents of the defendant Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada. The defendant Linklater was at all material times the Director of the Edmonton Institution; the defendant Hendrick was at all material times the Assistant Director; the defendant Hayman was at all material times in charge of the plaintiff's case management; and the defendants Paquette, "John Doe One" and "John Doe Two" were at all material times members of the Correction Service of Canada, and "staff members" within the meaning of the
Corrections and Conditional Release Act
.
[3]
The facts can be briefly stated as follows:
"On or about the 21st day of June, 1991 the plaintiff was removed from his placement in the general population of the Edmonton Institution and housed in the dissociation and segregation unit.
"On June 24, 1991, the plaintiff was served with a notice of involuntary transfer with a recommendation for transfer to Saskatchewan Penitentiary - High Maximum Security Unit. The plaintiff was advised of his right to present in writing a rebuttal to the notice of involuntary transfer. On June 27, 1991, the plaintiff caused the defendant Hayman to be served with his rebuttal.
"On June 26, 1991, the defendant Linklater reviewed the plaintiff's segregated status and decided to maintain administrative segregation pending a decision on the recommendation for transfer.
"On July 15, 1991, the defendant Headrick decided not to approve the recommendation for transfer and on July 17, 1991 the plaintiff was returned to general population."
[4]
The plaintiff raises the following causes of action against the individual defendants in his statement of claim:
para. 4 - conspiracy
para. 5 - abuse of authority
para. 6 - defamation
para. 7 - negligence
para. 9 - false imprisonment
para. 14 - breach of
Charter
rights
[5]
Counsel for the defendants brought a motion pursuant to rule 419(1)(a) to strike out the statement of claim as disclosing no reasonable cause of action as against the individual defendants, by reason of the court's want of jurisdiction over the named individuals. Following a hearing, the prothonotary ordered that the action be struck out as against the individual named defendants.
[6]
This prothonotary's order in this matter is not a discretionary order [see footnote 1]. However, his order may be reviewed for an error of law. The appellant submits that the prothonotary did commit an error of law and accordingly his decision is reviewable on that ground.
[7]
After hearing the full and able argument of both counsel, I have concluded that the prothonotary did not commit an error of law and that the appeal should be dismissed.
[8]
The prothonotary found that the issue of jurisdiction was governed by the three-part test in the
ITO
case, [see footnote 2] where it is stated, at page 766  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> :
"The general extent of the jurisdiction of the Federal Court has been the subject of much judicial consideration in recent years.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , and in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the essential requirements to support a finding of jurisdiction in the Federal Court were established. They are:
1. There must be a statutory grant of jurisdiction by the federal Parliament.
2. There must be an existing body of federal law which is essential to the disposition of the case and which nourishes the statutory grant of jurisdiction.
3. The law on which the case is based must be 'a law of Canada' as the phrase is used in s. 101 of the
Constitution Act
, 1867."
[9]
The prothonotary found that the individual defendants fall within s. 17(5)(b) of the
Federal Court Act
satisfying the first part of the test. However, he found that the plaintiff had not satisfied the second part of the test, that is, an existing body of federal law to nourish the grant of jurisdiction. The plaintiff not having met this second aspect, the prothonotary did not consider the third part of the test [see footnote 3].
[10]
On this appeal, counsel for the appellant acknowledged that the claim against the individual defendants cannot be founded on the
Charter
alone, which is not "a law of Canada" as the phrase is used in s. 101 of the
Constitution Act
, 1867.
[11]
Counsel also acknowledged that the mere fact that a tort occurred in a penitentiary setting is not enough to nourish the Federal Court's statutory grant of jurisdiction.
[12]
Counsel for the appellant submitted that the statutory source for jurisdiction could be found in the
Penitentiary Service Regulations
, C.R.C. 1978, c. 1251. He relied on the following provisions:
"Interpretation
"2. In these Regulations, ...
'institutional head' means the officer who has been appointed under the Act or these Regulations to be in charge of an institution and includes, during his absence or inability to act, his lawful deputy; (chef d'institution) 'member' means an officer or employee of the Service; (membre)
"Duty of Members
"3. It is the duty of every member to give effect, to the best of his ability, to the laws relating to the administration of penitentiaries in Canada and to use his best endeavours to achieve the purposes and objectives of the Service, namely, the custody, control, correctional training and rehabilitation of persons who are sentenced or committed to penitentiary.
"5.(1) The institutional head is responsible for the direction of his staff, the organization, safety and security of his institution and the correctional training of all inmates confined therein.
"Custody of Inmates
"13. The inmate shall, in accordance with directives, be confined in the institution that seems most appropriate having regard to
(a) the degree and kind of custodial control considered necessary or desirable for the protection of society, and
(b) the program of correctional training considered most appropriate for the inmate.
"Classification
"14. The file of an inmate shall be carefully reviewed before any decision is made concerning the classification, reclassification or transfer of the inmate.
"Dissociation
"40.(1) Where the institutional head is satisfied that
(a) for the maintenance of good order and discipline in the institution, or
(b) in the best interests of an inmate.
it is necessary or desirable that the inmate should be kept from associating with other inmates, he may order the inmate to be dissociated accordingly, but the case of every inmate so dissociated shall be considered, not less than once each month, by the Classification Board for the purpose of recommending to the institutional head whether or not the inmate should return to association with other inmates.
"40.1(2) An inmate who has been dissociated is not considered under punishment unless he has been sentenced as such and he shall not be deprived of any of his privileges and amenities by reason thereof, except those privileges and amenities that
(a) can only be enjoyed in association with other inmates, or
(b) cannot reasonably be granted having regard to the limitations of the dissociation area and the necessity for the effective operation thereof."
[13]
Counsel for the appellant submitted that this statutory framework fulfilled the requirements of the second part of the
ITO
test and further submitted that it established "a penitentiary law" not unlike maritime law [see footnote 4].
[14]
The prothonotary did not commit an error of law when he concluded that the causes of action asserted against the individual defendants arise from tortious liability and not from a body of federal law. The causes of action asserted against the individual defendants are not attributable to any fountainhead source of federal law, but rather are the emanations of provincial law relating to tortious liability [see footnote 5].
[15]
Counsel for the appellant relied heavily on the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case [see footnote 6]. That action was based on the so-called "gating" practice which was ruled to be illegal by the Supreme Court of Canada. In that case, the plaintiff instituted an action in the Trial Division for false arrest and imprisonment and maintained a claim against individual members of the National Parole Board who had suspended his mandatory supervision on two occasions when he became entitled to be released on mandatory supervision, resulting in his arrest. The Court of Appeal held that the source of his freedom at the time of his alleged false arrest and imprisonment could be found in federal law, in particular the
Penitentiary Act
and the
Parole Act
. The court concluded that there was a detailed statutory framework of federal law under which the plaintiff acquired not only the right to be free but also the right to remain so. The torts of false arrest and imprisonment, in that case, depended for their existence on federal law.
[16]
In the present instance, there is no such detailed statutory framework of federal law under which the appellant acquired rights. The torts asserted against the individual defendants do not depend for their existence on federal law.
[17]
Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed with costs to the respondent.
Appeal dismissed.
Editor: Jana A. Andersen/vem
Footnotes
1.	 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.).
2.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .	Had I granted the appeal, I would have remitted the matter to the prothonotary to consider and determine the third part of the
ITO
test.
4.	The body of federal law that nourishes the statutory grant of maritime jurisdiction is section 22 of the
Federal Court Act
. The grant of jurisdiction by section 22 is very broad.
5.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.).
[End of document]