[1]
Jerome, A.C.J.
: This is an application for an interlocutory injunction restraining the defendants from using the word "Aastra" as a trademark or trade name, and from otherwise infringing the rights of the plaintiffs in their trademark and trade name "Astra". At the hearing of this matter of March 28, 1995, I dismissed the application indicating these written reasons would follow.
[2]
The plaintiff, Astra Aktiebolag ("Astra AB") is a multinational corporation formed under the laws of Sweden. The plaintiff, Astra Pharma Inc., ("Astra Canada"), is a corporation established under the laws of the province of Ontario, and is a wholly owned subsidiary of Astra AB. Both companies are involved in research, development, manufacturing, marketing and sale of various healthcare products including prescription pharmaceutical, non-prescription pharmaceutical and medical devices.
[3]
Astra AB is the owner in Canada of the "Astra" trademarks and registrations numbers UCA 38110 and 215,994. The trademarks are used in Canada by Astra Canada under license, in association with the marketing and sale of healthcare products. The corporate name and business styles of Astra Canada have always included the word "Astra", such as, Astra Hospital Division, Astra Interpharm, Astra Lab, Astra Chemicals and Astra Pharmatek.
[4]
The defendants, Aastra Corporation ("Aastra Corp."), Aastra Aerospace ("Aastra Aero"), and Aastra Advanced Ceramics Inc. ("Aastra Ceramics") are related corporations formed under the laws of the Province of Ontario and have common premises, management and ownership.
[5]
The plaintiffs commenced an action in this court by way of Statement of Claim dated October 24, 1994, alleging the defendants to have infringed their rights in the "Astra" trademarks and trade name and to have drawn public attention to their wares, services and business, in such a way as to create confusion with the plaintiffs' wares, services and business. The plaintiffs now seek an interlocutory injunction restraining the defendants from these activities.
[6]
In this kind of application, the court is asked to render an order which not only pronounces on the merits of several complex issues, but which also restrains a party from carrying on a legitimate business enterprise without the benefit of assessing the evidence or the credibility of witnesses at trial. See, for example, Thurlow, C.J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.) at p. 56:
"It is always necessary to bear in mind that the damages that can be caused to a defendant in being restrained, for a period that may run into several years, from doing what, if he succeeds, he was, but for the injunction, entitled to do in the meantime, may have consequences that are as serious for him as any that his infringement, if he does not succeed, may have for the patentee."
[7]
Accordingly, the injunction should be confined to cases where the merits are clear and the risk of harm to the grieving party is great and imminent.
[8]
In the present case, however, the evidence shows that the word "Astra" is commonly registered in business names and trademarks in Canada to identify companies engaged in a variety of commercial enterprises. It is far from clear, therefore, whether the plaintiffs' rights in the trademark "Astra", entitle them to enjoin the defendants from using a similar, but not identical word, in relation to the field of biotechnology, a term which itself encompasses a variety of business activities.
[9]
Furthermore, in order to succeed at this stage, the plaintiffs must establish that they will suffer real and immediate irreparable harm not compensable in damages if the injunction is not granted. The evidence must be clear and not speculative. That onus has not been met here. The plaintiffs are drug companies involved in the manufacture and sale of pharmaceutical and medical devices and in pharmaceutical research. The defendants' businesses on the other hand are in aerospace, ceramics, telecommunications equipment and engineering research. There is no indication that the parties compete in any manner or that the plaintiffs have lost a single sale because of the defendants.
[10]
There is no basis therefore to support a finding that the plaintiffs will suffer irreparable harm between now and the time of trial should the injunction be refused. On the other hand, prohibiting the defendants from using the word "Aastra" could result in serious hardship for them. They would be required to either cease carrying on business or to change the name of their companies in respect of all areas of their business, including those to which the plaintiffs do not object. This would result in significant expense and loss of goodwill which is always difficult to quantify in damages. Under the circumstances, I am satisfied the balance of convenience is very much in the defendants' favour.
[11]
For these reasons, on March 28, 1995, I dismissed the application. Costs in the cause.
Application denied.
Editor: Reginald W. Curtis/ldl
[End of document]