[1]
Teitelbaum, J.
: This is an application for an order staying the execution of a removal order issued against the applicant "until such time as the applicant's application for leave and for judicial review of the decision of the Minister and/or his delegates dated October 19, 1994 wherein it was determined that there were insufficient humanitarian and compassionate considerations to warrant the processing of the applicant's application for permanent residence from within Canada".
[2]
The grounds for the applicant's motion, as stated in the motion are:
"i) There are serious issues to be determined on the applicant's application for leave and for judicial review.
"ii) That the balance of convenience lies in favor of staying the order to remove the applicant from Canada in the interim;
"iii) That irreparable harm would be caused to the applicant if the removal order was not stayed on an interim basis."
[3]
The above listed "grounds" for the applicant's motion are the necessary elements of the test for a stay.
[4]
In the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.), Mr. Justice Gibson, in speaking of the necessary elements of the test for a stay states, at page 65:
"The grounds for the motion before me are, first, that the decision of the immigration adjudicator raises serious questions to be tried on the application for leave and for judicial review; second, that in the event the deportation order is not stayed before the application for leave is determined and, if leave is granted, before the application for judicial review is itself determined, the applicant will be deported and will thereby suffer irreparable harm and the application for leave and for judicial review will be rendered moot; and, third, the balance of convenience favours the granting of a stay. These are the elements of the test for a stay enunciated in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  arrived in Canada on September 24, 1987 and made a claim to Convention refugee status on that date. On November 16, 1992, it was determined that the applicant did not have a credible basis for her refugee claim. An expulsion order was issued against the applicant.
[6]
After the applicant's arrival, she met a Mr. Ramazan Ali Golpasand, a citizen of Iran who had been granted the status of Convention refugee and, as a result, was later granted permanent resident status in Canada. Mr. Golpasand is not a Canadian citizen.
[7]
In November of 1987, while still without permanent status in Canada and just two months after arriving in Canada, the applicant states in paragraph 6 of her affidavit sworn on November 7, 1994:
"My relationship with Mr. Golpasand developed into one of deep love and affection. Mr. Golpasand and I began living together in November of 1987."
[8]
I am prepared to admit that I am not an expert on the issue of how long it would take an individual to develop a relationship "into one of deep love and affection" and that the time required to develop such an emotion may vary with each individual, but taking into account the circumstances of this case, I would be most hesitant to conclude that within a maximum period of two months the applicant did in fact develop a relationship with Mr. Golpasand "of deep love and affection".
[9]
On September 25, 1988, while still without permanent status in Canada, the applicant gave birth to a son, the father being Mr. Golpasand. The applicant's son is now six years old.
[10]
On October 9, 1989, while still without status, the applicant gave birth to a daughter, the father being Mr. Golpasand. The applicant's daughter is now five years old.
[11]
Not having been married to Mr. Golpasand, the applicant and Mr. Golpasand were legally married on November 19, 1989.
[12]
In January 1994, the applicant, having been refused Convention refugee status on November 16, 1992, applied for permission to apply for an exemption pursuant to s. 114(2) of the
Immigration Act
, S.C. 1976-77, c. 52, from the normal requirement that the application for permanent residence in Canada be made from outside Canada. The applicant's circumstances were reviewed. The immigration officer doing the review declined to make a favourable recommendation "in spite of her marriage to a permanent resident of Canada and the presence of two children here in Canada" (affidavit of Elena Buono). According to Elena Buono's affidavit, paragraph 2(b), she states that the applicant was refused because the applicant's husband (Golpasand) had been convicted of importing a narcotic and two charges of possession of a narcotic for the purposes of trafficking and because there was no evidence of any real establishment of the family in Canada, the "couple were on welfare". The immigration officer also found that the applicant faced no severe sanctions upon her return to Nicaragua.
[13]
The applicant was advised of this negative decision by letter dated January 26, 1994. On January 28, the applicant commenced an application for leave and judicial review (IMM-416-94) which sought to challenge the January 26, 1994 negative decision.
[14]
After the January 26, 1994 negative decision, the applicant was scheduled to be removed to Nicaragua when she was seven months pregnant with her third child. For this reason "among others", the removal was deferred.
[15]
On April 7, 1994, the applicant gave birth to a son, the applicant's husband being the father.
[16]
On August 10, 1994, Mr. Justice Gibson issued an order dismissing the applicant's leave application which had sought to challenge the January 26, 1994 negative s. 114 application ("humanitarian and compassionate" (H & C) application).
[17]
On behalf of the applicant, a second H & C application was prepared and submitted to Citizenship and Immigration. On October 5, 1994, the applicant submitted her H & C application at which time she was directed to report for removal from Canada to Nicaragua on November 14, 1994.
[18]
For a second time, the applicant's circumstances were reviewed. This review again resulted in a negative decision. This decision was sent by letter to the applicant. The letter of decision is dated October 19, 1994 and was received by the applicant on October 25, 1994.
"October 19, 1994
Blanca Estela Morenco
2101 Islington Ave., #210
Weston, Ontario
M9P 3R1
Dear Mrs. Morenco:
This refers to your application pursuant to subsection 114(2) for exemption from subsection 9(1) of the
Immigration Act
to have an application for permanent residence processed from within Canada.
Your application and personal circumstances have been carefully reviewed. It has been determined, that there are insufficient compelling humanitarian and compassionate considerations to warrant an exemption from normal legislative requirements.
Since you are the subject of a removal order, your file is being reviewed by Detention and Removals CIC at 6855 Airport Road, Mississauga, Ontario L4V 1E8 for necessary arrangement.
I regret that the decision could not be more favourable. The refusal to process your application from within Canada does not affect your right to apply abroad. Immigration legislation requires that an application for permanent residence be submitted at a Visa post outside Canada." (Exhibit "G" to applicant's affidavit)
[19]
The H & C review conducted by P. Russell took into consideration, amongst other circumstances, the fact that the applicant now had a third child all of whom were living in Canada.
[20]
In her handwritten notes, P. Russell noted:
"the applicant had a negative 'humanitarian and compassionate' decision made on January 26, 1994;
the applicant sought to challenge that decision, and her removal was deferred pending the outcome of that challenge;
the applicant's challenge was dismissed on August 15, 1994;
the applicant's removal was scheduled for November 14, 1994;
the applicant has three Canadian-born children;
the applicant's husband is a permanent resident who is incarcerated as a result of trafficking in narcotics, being sentenced to six years imprisonment with no parole;
there is a possibility the applicant's husband may be deported upon his release from prison;
the applicant is a welfare recipient who has not demonstrated establishment;
the applicant has a large extended family outside of Canada;
there was no new information presented other than she is no longer pregnant, and now has a third child;
the children are not being ordered deported, and as Canadian citizens, can return to Canada in the future; and
there were no circumstances to warrant processing of the applicant's application from within Canada.
her husband can't submit sponsorship." (Exhibit "B", Buono affidavit)
[21]
As a result of the above negative H & C decision, the applicant filed, on November 2, 1994, into the Federal Court Registry at Toronto, an application for leave and for judicial review of the October 19, 1994 decision wherein it was determined that there were no humanitarian and compassionate grounds to warrant the processing of the applicant's application for permanent residence from within Canada.
[22]
Because the applicant was scheduled to be removed from Canada, on November 14, 1994, an application to stay the removal was filed on or about November 8, 1994.
[23]
As I have stated and now repeat, it is trite law that in order to obtain a stay of a removal order pending an application for leave and judicial review, the applicant must convince the court that the applicant has, at least, an arguable case, will suffer irreparable harm if removed and that the balance of convenience is in the applicant's favour. The applicant must convince the court that all three elements are present and in her favour. The failure to show any one of the three elements is fatal to the application.
An Arguable Case
[24]
Counsel for the applicant submits that in the notes of P. Russell (Exhibit "B", Buono affidavit) it clearly states, as a reason for refusal of the H & C application is the fact that the husband of the applicant cannot submit an application for sponsorship for his wife, the applicant. Counsel submits that this statement is a "clearly erroneous statement". He submits that the only requirements for sponsorship of a spouse are that the sponsor be a permanent resident in Canada and that he/she be at least 18 years old. He submits that a "criminal" can sponsor a member of a family class. Furthermore, he submits, the
Immigration Regulations
, s. 6(3) creates an exception for sponsors, in that, it is not necessary for a visa officer to consider the financial capability if the sponsor is one is sponsoring a spouse. Counsel thus submits P. Russell was clearly wrong when she wrote, in her notes "Husb - can't submit sponsorship".
[25]
Furthermore, counsel submits that P. Russell, the immigration officer making the decision, was engaging in pure speculation in saying that the possibility exists that the applicant's husband will be removed from Canada and by doing so she had exceeded her jurisdiction. Counsel submits that before removal of a permanent resident, one who has been determined to be a Convention refugee, pursuant to s. 27(3) of the
Immigration Act
various steps must first be done before removal could take place. Nothing has so far been undertaken and thus the officer was engaging in pure speculation when she concluded that such a possibility exists. This, he states, is particularly so because only an immigration adjudicator can order the removal of a permanent resident and not an individual such as immigration officer Russell.
[26]
Counsel thus submits the question, in that Russell was clearly wrong on the issue of sponsorship, was her decision on the H & C issue, based on this error, also not in error?
[27]
Counsel submits that Russell was in error, was she states, in her notes "no family here". Counsel submits that the applicant has three children "here" meaning in Canada as well as a husband. Counsel submits that Russell determined the applicant's H & C application on the basis that the applicant was a single mother with three children without a husband and this, he submits is an error of law.
[28]
Counsel for respondent submits that the applicant has failed to show an arguable case. She states that with regard to the issue of sponsorship, the sponsor's financial circumstances are looked at because s. 6 of the
Immigration Regulations
only applies if the application is made from outside Canada. She believes this regulation may not apply if a sponsorship application is made from within Canada.
[29]
I do not have to decide this issue.
[30]
Counsel for respondent also submits that if the applicant's husband wanted to sponsor his wife, the applicant, he would have done so and by not having done so, to the present time she states that one can conclude that he does not wish to do so.
[31]
There is no doubt that at the present time if the husband wished to file an application for sponsorship he could not be denied the right to do so solely on the basis that he is presently incarcerated.
[32]
In that the applicant's husband is a permanent resident and has not been ordered removed form Canada, he at this moment would have the legal right to sponsor his wife. Therefore, Officer Russell was clearly wrong when she states, as she did, "Husb - can't submit sponsorship". The applicant's husband is a permanent resident in Canada having been granted Convention refugee status, the husband having come to Canada from Iran.
[33]
Counsel for the respondent submits that I should ignore this erroneous statement of fact because the officer was under no legal obligation to give reasons why she decided as she did as her decision was purely a discretionary one. Counsel submits the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), at page 239, where Mr. Justice Hugessen, in speaking of a H & C review states at page 239:
"The decision itself is wholly a matter of judgment and discretion and the law gives the applicant no right to any particular outcome.
. . . . .
"In a case such as this one the applicant does not have a 'case to meet' of which he must be given notice; rather it is for him to persuade the decision-maker that he should be given exceptional treatment and exempted from the general requirements of the law. No hearing need be held and no reasons need be given."
[34]
I agree that the officer conducting a H & C review need not give reasons for having decided the review against an applicant. This does not mean that if the officer's notes are submitted and it shows that one of the factors considered at arriving at a negative H & C review decision is clearly erroneous that the court cannot conclude that the immigration officer based her decision on an erroneous fact that may convince the court that the decision should be quashed.
[35]
I am not called upon to make the decision to quash the immigration officer's decision, only to determine if the applicant has shown that she has an "arguable case".
[36]
The fact that the reviewing officer clearly made an erroneous statement with regard to the issue of sponsorship is sufficient for me to decide that the applicant has shown an arguable case.
Irreparable Harm
[37]
Counsel for the applicant submits that the applicant will suffer irreparable harm if she is separated from her husband and from her three children who are not subject to removal from Canada.
[38]
Counsel submits that if the children remain in Canada they cannot remain with their father because he is incarcerated at the Millhaven Penitentiary and thus they will probably become "wards of the state".
[39]
I am satisfied that the applicant will not be subject to irreparable harm if she is removed from Canada.
[40]
With regard to the issue of being separated from her husband. It is not for me to say that it may be to her advantage to be separated from him, more on this later, but the fact is that she is now separated from him as he is now incarcerated at the Millhaven Correctional Facility. The fact that the applicant can visit her husband, when prison regulations permit, does not mean that she is not "separated" from her husband.
[41]
In addition, I am not convinced that irreparable harm is caused to an individual who is separated from her husband, especially with the facts of this case. Surely the applicant knew, when she married Mr. Golpasand that the possibility existed that she would not be permitted to remain in Canada even if she married a permanent resident. Surely, she realized that the possibility existed that she would be separated from her husband if he remained in Canada and she would be obliged to return to Nicaragua.
[42]
With regard to the issue of the children and the irreparable harm that may arise if their mother were to abandon them and leave them in Canada to the care of the Children's Aid Society or if they became "wards of the state", I do not mean by this that the children would be physically harmed if left in Canada, I am satisfied the irreparable harm of being abandoned by their mother may cause irreparable psychological harm to the children. This irreparable harm is not with regard to the applicant. The applicant has the option of taking the children with her and ensuring that they would not be subject to irreparable harm, that is, psychological harm.
[43]
In that the applicant has been determined not to be a Convention refugee, there is no fear of the applicant being persecuted in Nicaragua and thus would not suffer irreparable harm because of persecution.
[44]
The applicant and the children, if they go with their mother, will have family in Nicaragua. I take the statement in Russell's notes "Has large extended family outside Canada" to mean that she has an extended family in Nicaragua. Surely, the applicant and her children will be in a better position for "support" with family than to be alone with a husband in the penitentiary.
[45]
I am satisfied that the applicant cannot show irreparable harm and thus she has failed to satisfy the test to obtain a stay of a removal order.
Balance Of Convenience
[46]
I need not discuss this element of the test, other than to say that I am satisfied that the balance of convenience lies in favour of the respondent.
[47]
As I have stated, I believe it necessary to address the issue of the applicant's husband Ali Golpasand.
[48]
Mr. Ali Golpasand, it is admitted, is a citizen of Iran who has been granted the status of Convention refugee by the Canadian authorities. He was subsequently granted permanent resident status in Canada. The exhibits attesting to the above are illegible and I therefore am unable to give dates as to when the above occurred.
[49]
The granting of the status of Convention refugee indicates that the Canadian authorities were satisfied that Golpasand was an individual who was persecuted in Iran. He was given the privilege of being able to permanently reside in a democratic country where there is no fear of persecution and where Canadians are granted freedoms unheard of in almost all other countries of the world. What does Mr. Golpasand do now that he has been granted the freedom of not being persecuted? He becomes involved in criminal activity. According to Mr. Golpasand, he was first arrested on November 20, 1990 and was charged with trafficking in narcotics. He was sentenced on January 29, 1991 to six years' imprisonment. This means Mr. Golpasand could have been kept incarcerated until 1997.
[50]
In July of 1992, a mere one and one-half years after his six year sentence, Mr. Golpasand is transferred to a halfway house. Six months later, he is charged with a parole violation and was then put back in detention until April 1993 when he received full parole. On February 1, 1994, Golpasand is again arrested and charged with trafficking a narcotic. On July 22, 1994, 18 months were added on to his original six year sentence. According to the affidavit of Elena Buono, Mr. Golpasand was originally charged and convicted of importing a narcotic and two charges of possession of a narcotic for the purposes of trafficking.
[51]
Mr. Golpasand is presently incarcerated. He is the husband of the applicant and the father of her three children. The applicant and her three children are supported by welfare, not her husband. Mr. Golpasand has not received a notice of inquiry from immigration. I assume that when Rhonda Marquis, an associate in the law firm representing the applicant mentions a notice of inquiry she means a notice of inquiry pursuant to s. 27 of the
Immigration Act
wherein a person who has been granted permanent residence status, is to be considered for removal from Canada.
[52]
It would appear to me that the case of Mr. Golpasand is the type of case where upon his being released from prison, whether on parole or otherwise, an inquiry should be held to determine whether, as a result of his criminal dealings, he is not a danger to society. Mr. Golpasand not only was convicted for possession of a narcotic, he was convicted of
importing and trafficking in narcotics
. He was again convicted for trafficking in narcotics on February 1, 1994, while on parole.
[53]
Dealing in and with narcotics creates a danger to the public and thus Mr. Golpasand should be removed from Canada and returned to Iran. He has abused the hospitality granted to him by the Canadian authorities.
[54]
The application for stay of a removal order is denied.
[55]
I heard this application for stay by a telephone conference call on November 10, 1994. At the end of the hearing, I took the matter under reserve and ordered a temporary stay so as to be able to study the issues raised by the applicant and give reasons for my decision.
[56]
The temporary stay order is no longer valid and the respondent may effect the removal of the applicant at the earliest possible time.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/gms
[End of document]